=== PAGE 1 ===
Technical Note DIKSHA Document Name: Technical note on DIKSHA (Digital Infrastructure for School Education) Document Version: 5.0 A (Draft) Last updated on: Dec 23, 2022

=== PAGE 2 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Table of Contents Table of Contents 1 About the Document 6 Introduction 6 Objectives of this document 6 Document structure 6 List of Abbreviations 8 DIKSHA Architecture Design & Principles 11 Overview 11 Tenets for NDEAR Framework Elements 12 DIKSHA Technology Architecture Design and Principles 16 1. Federation & Choice 16 2. Decentralized & Distributed 16 3. Powered by Building Blocks 17 4. Platform Thinking 17 5. Unifying not Uniform 17 6. Enabling Ecosystem 17 7. Inclusive by Design 18 8. Extensibility 19 9. Scalability 19 10. Being Resilient 20 11. Ensuring Openness 20 12. Data & Observability 22 13. Interoperable 23 14. Portable 23 15. Generalized and Conﬁgurable 23 16. Designed for Solutioning 23 17. Evolvable & Iterative 24 18. Trust by Design 25 19. Privacy by Design 25 20. Security by Design 26 1

=== PAGE 3 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Building Blocks 26 Overview 26 Characteristics of Building Blocks 27 Physical and Digital Building Blocks 27 Types of Building Blocks 28 Building Block Approach in NDEAR 30 NDEAR & DIKSHA 32 Open Standards 33 Technology 33 Content 34 Learning 34 Reference Applications / Solutions 34 Open Data & Analytics 34 DIKSHA & Sunbird 35 Open Source Software or Speciﬁcations 40 DIKSHA Operations Overview 67 Release Cycle 68 Build 69 Scope 69 Epics and Stories 69 Telemetry Instrumentation 70 Delivery Plan 71 Develop 71 Coding Repositories 71 Consolidate 72 Communicate 72 Test 74 Quality Assurance Process 74 Root Cause Analysis (RCA) 76 Test Execution Plan 76 Test cases 76 Deploy 77 DIKSHA Deployment Architecture 77 DIKSHA Release Deployment Management Process 80 2

=== PAGE 4 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note DIKSHA Release Deployment Environments 80 DIKSHA Release Deployment Milestones 82 Deploy Screenshots 83 Monitor 85 NOC Monitoring Scope 85 Emergency Process 85 Emergency Approach 85 Incidents that Qualify for Emergency 85 Incident Management Process 86 Flow Transition Process 87 Critical Dashboards - Grafana 87 Incident Handling Process 95 Support 98 S1 Support Process 98 S2 Support Process 99 Issues Tracking and Resolution 99 Setting up DIKSHA Support Services 100 Measure 100 Report Conﬁguration 100 Reporting Infrastructure 100 Infrastructure Components 101 DIKSHA Report Workﬂow 102 Report Request Workﬂow 104 DIKSHA Solutions Overview 106 Diverse Scenarios and Stakeholders 107 Solution Categories 108 Consumption Solutions 108 Sourcing Solutions 108 Essential/Foundational Solutions 109 Solutions on DIKSHA 109 Energized Textbooks 109 Teacher Professional Development 110 Question Bank 111 Content Sourcing 111 3

=== PAGE 5 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Content Authoring 112 Quizzes 112 Content Consumption 112 Data Tools and Dashboards 113 Public Dashboards 113 Administrator Dashboards 117 Chatbot 119 Digital Credentials 120 Collaboration 120 Surveys and Observations 121 Overview 123 Digital Public Good (DPG) 123 Digital Public Good Alliance (DPGA) 123 Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) 123 Ethical Considerations for DPI 124 Physical and Digital Resources 125 Free & Open Source Software (FOSS) and Creative Commons Licenses 125 DIKSHA Platform as DPI and Assets as DPGs 125 DIKSHA DPG List 126 History 127 Future 128 Innovation through Collaboration & Cooperation 129 Global Adoption 129 Solution Areas 129 Leveraging Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) & Machine Learning(ML) 130 Appendix A - Functional & Nonfunctional Requirements - Kamesh - Done 132 Appendix B - Delivery Plan Status Dashboard - Kamesh-Done 132 Done 132 Appendix C - Telemetry Speciﬁcations - Kamesh - Done 132 Appendix D - Design Note on DataSets and Data Exhausts - Kamesh - Done 132 Appendix E - DIKSHA Release Notes - Kamesh - Done 132 Appendix F - Release Documentation Process - Kamesh - Done 132 Appendix G - DIKSHA Release Upgrade Document - Anand V 132 Appendix H - DIKSHA User Manual - Kamesh - Done 132 Appendix I - API Reference Documentation - Kamesh - Done 132 4

=== PAGE 6 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Appendix J - DIKSHA Quality Assurance Process - Anand V 132 Appendix K - DIKSHA RCA Process - Anand V 132 Appendix L - DIKSHA UAT Execution sheet - Anand V 132 Appendix M - Regression Test case suite for DIKSHA NF & Circle Regression - Anand V 133 Appendix N - S1 Support Process - Anand V 133 Appendix O - S2 Support Process - Anand V 133 Appendix P - Ticket Lifecycle - Anand V 133 Appendix Q - Issue Tracker - Anand V 133 Appendix R - Hawkeye Conﬁguration Guide - Kamesh - Done 133 Appendix S - Hawkeye Workﬂows - Kamesh - Done 133 Appendix T - List of Code Repositories - Kamesh - Done 133 Appendix U - TPD Support System Guideline s v2.0 for Sharing with States - Anand V 133 5

=== PAGE 7 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note About the Document Introduction This document is a technical note on DIKSHA, the digital infrastructure for school education, an initiative of the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), Ministry of Education, Government of India. The goal of DIKSHA is to democratize learning. It provides a common platform that the education ecosystem may leverage to participate in and contribute towards, to achieve the country’s learning goals. DIKSHA is built using MIT licensed open source technology called Sunbird that incorporates internet scale technologies and enables several use-cases and solutions for teaching and learning. Its federated architecture allows any Indian State/UT to use the DIKSHA platform to design and run programs for school education, foundational learning and to support inclusive learning for the underserved and differently-abled communities of learners and teachers. Objectives of this document This document aims to provide an overview of: ● The architecture and design principles on which DIKSHA is built ● The processes used to build, test, deploy, monitor, support and measure DIKSHA operations ● The solutions built speciﬁcally on the DIKSHA platform to address consumption and sourcing needs for India’s education ecosystem ● DIKSHA as a Digital Public Good ● DIKSHA’s future vision Document structure This document has six (6) parts - A, B, C, D, E and F Part A contains information on DIKSHA’s Architecture and Design. It provides information about ● DIKSHA Architecture Design Dimensions & Principles elaborates the ﬁve design dimensions and 20 design principles on which the DIKSHA platform is architected. ● DIKSHA Building Blocks describes the underlying Sunbird building blocks used to instantiate the DIKSHA platform. ● Open Source Software or Speciﬁcations provides a list of software or speciﬁcations used in DIKSHA 6

=== PAGE 8 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Part B contains information on DIKSHA Operations. It contains sections that provide information about ● DIKSHA Build Process: This section provides information on the process followed for every DIKSHA version release. It also provides information and samples of the typical artifacts generated during different stages of the build process ● DIKSHA Quality Assurance Process: This section elaborates the process followed to test the DIKSHA platform for stability, performance and quality before it is rolled out to production. The section also provides information and samples of artifacts generated in the quality assurance phase. ● DIKSHA Deployment Process: This section provides information on the process followed to deploy a typical DIKSHA version release. It also provides information on the software requirements and the detailed installation manual. ● DIKSHA Monitoring Process: This section provides information on the process of monitoring DIKSHA services on a regular basis. It also provides information on the tools used to monitor the DIKSHA platform. ● DIKSHA Support Process: This section provides information on the S1, S2 processes followed to provide support to DIKSHA users and the lifecycle of a support ticket from the point it is raised until its logical closure. ● DIKSHA Telemetry Instrumentation: This section provides information on the telemetry instrumentation done for DIKSHA. It contains information on the telemetry speciﬁcations, how telemetry is sent, consumed and the libraries used. There is a separate section on data sets and data exhausts and how these are made available to DIKSHA users (States, Organizations). ● DIKSHA Measurement Processes: This section provides in-depth information on DIKSHA’s reporting infrastructure, the conﬁguration required, and processes to be followed for report generation and requests. Part C contains information on DIKSHA solutions. It contains two sections based on the solution categories: ● Consumption Solutions : This section provides information on DIKSHA’s consumption solutions. The consumption solutions are software developed to enable digital solutions for learning, capacity building, or professional development solutions for India’s education ecosystem consisting of educationists, experts, organizations, institutions - government, autonomous institutions, non-govt and private organisations. ● Sourcing Solutions: This section provides information on DIKSHA’s content sourcing solution. The sourcing solution allows actors in India’s education ecosystem to source content for DIKSHA by creating, curating, collaborating and/or crowdsourcing it. Part D contains information on DIKSHA as a Digital Public Good (DPG). 7

=== PAGE 9 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Part E contains information on DIKSHA’s future vision. Part F contains a list of appendices from Appendix A - X. Overall, the appendices cover detailed relevant and supporting documentation generated for DIKSHA. Each appendix covers one area. List of Abbreviations Acronym Expansion AI Artiﬁcial Intelligence API Application Programming Interface API Application Programming Interface AWS Amazon Web Services BEO Block Education Oﬃcer CBSE Central Board for Secondary Education CRP Community Resource Person DPG Digital Public Goods DPI Digital Public Infrastructure FA Federated Architecture FRS Functional Requirements Speciﬁcations GPL General Public License HM Head Master HP Himachal Pradesh MeitY Ministry of Electronics & IT ML Machine Learning MoE Ministry of Education NDEAR National Digital Education Architecture NOC Network Operations Center OCR Optical Character Recognition PRD Product Requirement Document RCA Root Cause Analysis 8

=== PAGE 10 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Acronym Expansion S1 Severity 1 S2 Severity 2 SRS Software Requirements Speciﬁcations SQAA School Quality Assessment and Assurance TPS Transactions Per Second UP Uttar Pradesh WCAG Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 9

=== PAGE 11 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Part A DIKSHA Architecture & Design 10

=== PAGE 12 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note DIKSHA Architecture Design & Principles 1 Overview The large, complex and diverse nature of India’s education ecosystem necessitates that the technology architecture and design of DIKSHA addresses a wide range of needs and uses. A good design helps accelerate adoption, helps in achieving the nation’s education-related goals, improves capacity building for teachers, and aids education administrators in tracking and monitoring programs, while also addressing India’s diversity through innovative integrated capabilities across contexts. As a technological framework to deliver learning needs for India, DIKSHA aims to make available building blocks for the creation of new tools and solutions for a unifying architecture, while leveraging existing systems to upgrade and become interoperable. The architecture intends to enable innovation opportunities for different stakeholders and amplify innovations and solutions in an exponential manner. Overall, the architecture of DIKSHA facilitates the development of a platform that is federated but interoperable, while ensuring autonomy to all relevant stakeholders(especially States/UTs) enables participation of the ecosystem and also individuals. 1 The architecture and design principles adopted by DIKSHA are similar to those prescribed in and adopted by other government policies, frameworks and platforms like MeitY open source policy, NDSAP Policy for open Government data, India Stack, NDEAR, etc. 11

=== PAGE 13 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Tenets for NDEAR Framework Elements Figure 1: Tenets for NDEAR Framework The NDEAR main report 2 prescribes four tenets to develop digital infrastructure for education. They are: ● Focus on beneﬁciaries and users using principles for: ○ User-centric design to develop infrastructure and solutions, and use universal learning design principles to support greater inclusion ○ Affordance, choice and agency to create diverse solutions with multimodal coherent access that enable a learning continuum ○ Open access to assets so that learning happens anytime, anywhere, for anyone in a formal, informal or alternate setting ○ Diversity and inclusion to accommodate different languages, geographies, device types, access (online/oﬄine), spectrum of special needs for learners with learning diﬃculties, the differently abled and accessibility needs ● Adopt an ‘ecosystem’ approach NOT a ‘system’ approach as no single application, portal, technology can address India’s education challenges. The key factors to foster an 2 NDEAR Main Report - https://www.ndear.gov.in/resources.html 12

=== PAGE 14 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note effective educational ecosystem are participation, collaboration and contribution by the various stakeholders. In order for the ecosystem to organically evolve, the NDEAR report suggests that the ecosystem must be: ○ Catalyzed through innovation, experimentation and contextualization for diversity, inclusion and special needs ○ Energized across actors, geographical levels (Center, State, District, Block, School) ○ Supported by policies and infrastructure ○ Supportive of the programme, asset and solution ecosystems across government, non-proﬁt and private sectors ○ Governed by nine principles to catalyze and energize the ecosystem players ● Create clear principles to govern open data, data empowerment and protection. The principles suggested for this tenet include: ○ Open Data for evolvability of solutions and policies. ○ ‘Emit’ (vs ‘Extract’) of data streams from usage, user interactions and outcomes. ○ Follow open data policies in the interest of transparency and evolution. ○ Data empowerment and protection of individuals’ privacy and conﬁdentiality. ○ Privacy by Design: Privacy of beneﬁciaries of the platform is of utmost importance, and special care must be taken with regards to the data of children. ○ Personally Identiﬁable Information (PII) and data collection must be minimal, limited, used for stated speciﬁc purposes and must be non-intrusive. ○ Consent architecture must be developed and strictly followed. Particular attention must be made to the design of technology and processes for clear and explicit consent. Special attention should be paid to ensuring the protection of children and seeking correct and appropriate consent for speciﬁc engagements and actions from parents and guardians. Sweeping, generalized consent processes, practices, terms and design must be discouraged. ○ Users must have appropriate access, control and visibility to their personal data. ○ Protection of Children: Children must be protected against identity tracing, tracking, labelling and discrimination. Protecting the privacy and conﬁdentiality of their performance and personally identiﬁable data must be of paramount importance. ○ Data Lifecycle: Entry, Storage, Usage, Control, Retention and Deletion ■ Single entry for a data record - avoid ineﬃcient duplication of effort. ■ Single source of truth. ■ Accountable access, distribution and storage of data. ■ ederated control structures. ■ Integrated visibility of data for policy evolution. ■ Lifecycle of data from generation - storage - deletion 13

=== PAGE 15 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note ● Maintain Design and Architecture Principles that are unifying, evolving and relevant for technology as well as institutional design in the context of scale, diversity and complexity. Figure 2: NDEAR Institutional & Technology Design and Architecture Principles No. Principle Description 1 Unifying not uniform India’s diversity must be retained and uniﬁed in a coherent way for the ampliﬁcation of efforts by all actors. 2 Ecosystem driven No single app/portal/technology can solve India’s education issues. Energising the ecosystem across governments, society and market players is necessary to bring in innovation, diversity, contextualisation and choice. Continuously engaging the ecosystem through transparent rules and a set of relevant tools is key to harnessing the energy of the ecosystem actors. 14

=== PAGE 16 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note No. Principle Description 3 Unbundled and combinable Instead of focusing purely on “solutions”, build underlying unbundled building blocks to allow diverse solutions by the ecosystem. Fully pre-built systems cannot evolve and allow for diverse solution needs. All aspects of NDEAR must be built as unbundled microservices offered via APIs that are interoperable and can be combined to build newer solutions. 4 Federated, but interoperable While a central system can speed up adoption, it should be a choice, and bringing interoperability across many federated systems through common speciﬁcations is necessary. 5 Address open access Anyone can learn, anyone can help learn, anyone can support and administer. Open license and open-source policies are key. 6 Address diversity, inclusion, and special needs Design to cater to diversity across language, context, device, connectivity, capacity, etc., and ensure the system addresses users with special needs, with relevant tools and content. The system shall provide uniform access to everyone, including those in remote areas, with limited or no connectivity, and support the end-point devices at the root level. 7 Evolvable Design must allow the entire infrastructure to evolve and adapt on a continuous basis without needing dramatic upgrades. 8 Provide choice by design Design to allow choice for actors (States, boards, schools, teachers, students, etc.) with respect to choice of apps, choice of usage within their context, etc. 9 Privacy, security and trust by design Design to protect privacy and data of users and entities and imbue trust in every interaction. 15

=== PAGE 17 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note No. Principle Description 10 Leverage investments With respect to existing systems at various administrative levels (Center, State, and school), it is essential that they be leveraged by upgrading them as per NDEAR architecture principles, integrating them with other NDEAR building blocks, and when necessary consolidating them into uniﬁed platforms. This is essential to provide simpler, coherent, and uniﬁed experiences to key stakeholders and also to bring them in line with NDEAR. DIKSHA Technology Architecture Design and Principles DIKSHA’s technology architecture and design principles have evolved from the tenet of unifying, evolving and relevant design and architecture principles as advocated in the NDEAR report. The following are DIKSHA’s 20 foundational technology principles: 1. Federation & Choice The DIKSHA platform is designed to enable actors in the learning ecosystem with the autonomy and choice to decide how to join the platform (e.g., different device types) and what to join for (e.g., to learn, to earn credentials, observe learning programs, etc.). It provides autonomy and choice to institutions and users in terms of building appropriate content, supporting different taxonomies, creating contextual solutions, and fully supporting a seamless interplay between physical-digital mediums, synchronous-asynchronous modes and diverse device types. 2. Decentralized & Distributed The DIKSHA platform is designed to allow interoperability and information sharing between various entities, information technology systems and applications. All DIKSHA services, data, and applications are held at multiple levels - say national, State and local levels - in a decentralized manner, following the principle of minimalism at each level. For example, teacher data and registries are maintained by the States, student data may be maintained by the district, municipality or ward. All systems are designed to be operated in a federated model. They can function independently but in an interoperable manner. In this direction, DIKSHA will also be distributed with interactions happening in different systems managed and run by different entities. For example, each State may have their own systems/solutions built on the core DIKSHA platform facilitating all their learning interactions and at the same time being interoperable with each other. Each State may also build their own applications on the DIKSHA platform. 16

=== PAGE 18 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note 3. Powered by Building Blocks The DIKSHA platform is built using underlying digital building blocks (e.g., learning services) that are atomic, independent and reusable. Unbundled components/services are offered via APIs and other well-deﬁned mechanisms to allow diverse solutions by the ecosystem and to ensure that the systems can evolve. Building block-driven design enables adaptability and conﬁguration of solutions of various kinds. Building blocks have to interoperate with other building blocks within the same system or across systems. As long as they are compliant (adhere to laid down platform policies and rules of engagement) and compatible (adhere to various speciﬁcations adopted by the platform such as API speciﬁcations, data speciﬁcations, content speciﬁcations, etc.) with the DIKSHA architecture, they may be used by other relevant entities to develop solutions and programmes. 4. Platform Thinking The DIKSHA infrastructure allows the ecosystem of stakeholders (e.g., Boards, training institutions, States, content providers, etc.) to use, create solutions on top, and extend their solutions/services for education. The entire platform design allows the ecosystem to use, extend, build their own assets, create their own processes, build their own solutions, all on top of the core platform. 5. Unifying not Uniform To retain and unify India’s diversity in a coherent way for the ampliﬁcation of efforts by all actors, the DIKSHA platform acts as a unifying force and does not force uniformity across the highly federal and diverse system. The DIKSHA platform thus is not one solution that ﬁts all, but is a platform consisting of a set of digital building blocks that can be leveraged by the federated system (e.g., by the Center, State/Board, School ) in their own way, by integrating into their own systems, processes, and practices freeing the platform custodian from becoming a solution provider for all use cases, user scenarios and user types. 6. Enabling Ecosystem No single application, portal, technology can address India’s education challenges. The key factors to foster an effective educational ecosystem are participation, collaboration and contribution by the various stakeholders. The DIKSHA platform is designed to enable the ecosystem and to ensure that actors across the spectrum are energized and catalyzed to innovate, experiment and contextualize solutions for diversity, inclusion and special needs. They can operate and deliver necessary and wide variety of: ● Assets (e.g., diverse content), 17

=== PAGE 19 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note ● Programmes (e.g., Central, State or School-level education initiatives), ● Solutions (e.g., learning services, networking services), and ● Applications (e.g. State-speciﬁc DIKSHA portals and mobile apps). Continuously engaging the ecosystem (Government, civil society and private organizations) through transparent rules and a set of relevant tools is key to harnessing the energy of the ecosystem actors. 7. Inclusive by Design User Base Keeping in mind NDEAR’s tenet of focusing on users and beneﬁciaries, DIKSHA uses user-centric design practices to develop infrastructure and solutions using universal learning design principles to support greater inclusion. It supports accessibility best practices (such as WCAG principles 3 ) catering to users with special needs, and inclusive by taking into account aspects such as users’ digital proﬁciency, language barriers, and access to the Internet and addresses a spectrum of special needs for learners with learning diﬃculties, the differently abled with accessibility needs. It provides affordance, choice and agency to create diverse solutions with multimodal coherent access that enable a learning continuum. DIKSHA addresses the language diversity of India by giving special focus to multilingual content, technologies to enable dictionary/wordnet services, input capture services, speech detection, translation services, multilingual portal, etc. It leverages the many Indian and international open-source projects and assets built within various Government and research institutions by upgrading and integrating them as reusable open-source assets or services to amplify and extend the work. With the advancement in AI/ML and wide access to mobile devices (with camera and microphone), it ensures these technologies are leveraged to enable millions of users to interact, discover, learn, and collaborate in Indian languages. DIKSHA Solutions achieve universal access by providing multi-channel, coherent experiences (not siloed and broken), across different mediums such as mobile, tablet, web, and desktop. For example, a user accessing a training course on a mobile phone or tablet can resume the training on a desktop seamlessly. In this way, the system provides access to everyone, including those in remote areas, with limited or no connectivity, and supports the end-point devices at the root level. 3 Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) - https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/ 18

=== PAGE 20 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Systems & Processes Keeping NDEAR’s tenth tenet to leverage investments as a guide, DIKSHA’s federated architecture is designed to connect and leverage varied systems and processes including the applications, solutions and content that currently exist in other systems. Existing systems at various administrative levels (Centre, State/Boards, Schools), are leveraged by providing additional workﬂows, and/or upgrading them as per DIKSHA architecture principles (by using standard protocols and specs) so that multiple interoperable platforms and apps are enabled and integrated with DIKSHA building blocks on the DIKSHA platform. This provides simpler, coherent, and uniﬁed experiences to all actors in the ecosystem. 8. Extensibility Maintaining NDEAR’s tenet of unbundled and combinable, the DIKSHA platform is designed for components to be minimalistic, independently replaceable and extensible. This allows different components to be loosely coupled while building solutions, thereby enabling solutioning diversity and continued development. Different aspects of the infrastructure are extendable and hence, enable the creation of contextual solutions. 9. Scalability NDEAR recommends that all technology services and processes must be designed for operating at the intended scale (be it at National, State or local). Extreme automation, distributed human processes etc. are key aspects for overall system scale and manageability. In a federated and distributed system, scalability is not ensured by only using scalable products and services. For example, a central team cannot, irrespective of its size, curate content for all or address the different requirements of each State/Board. Such practices are contradictory to the principles of federation, autonomy and scale. Distributed processes ensure that the diverse needs of millions of DIKSHA users get addressed at scale. Automate to Scale Since the DIKSHA platform supports the usage and creation of many solutions at the scale of millions and billions of transactions, the operations of the system are automated as much as possible. Any operation (e.g., related to installation, deployment, testing, etc.) that is predictable, repetitive, requires long term sustainability and does not need human intervention, is automated. Benchmarking for Scalability The DIKSHA platform is being used across the country by several millions of users and multiple systems are integrated to the platform via APIs necessitating extreme scale and reliability of 19

=== PAGE 21 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note the core platform. All major releases of the platform are subjected to both burst (testing for sudden spikes of TPS at 10-100x from a below normal TPS, sustained over 1-4 hours) and soak testing (testing for 2-5x of average load for a duration of 48-72 hrs without services degrading). To easily do such benchmarks in a privacy friendly and cost eﬃcient manner for every major release, DIKSHA uses cloud infrastructure, automated benchmarking scripts/tools, and synthetic data. 10. Being Resilient NDEAR recommends that resilience is built into systems and services. DIKSHA being a federated and distributed system, DIKSHA systems and services are built to withstand failures by building automated recoveries. The processes and the structures driving decision making are resilient to rapidly changing needs and have the ﬂexibility and capability to re-adapt to handle disruptions. 11. Ensuring Openness Maintaining NDEAR’s tenets of interoperability and openness, DIKSHA harnesses capacity across ecosystems by building and reusing open source technologies, open source algorithms, open source libraries, open standards and opportunities, open data and also sharing everything built as open source. Open Source Leveraging Open Source : All services (except those that are notiﬁed as sensitive) built into DIKSHA’s digital infrastructure are based on and built as open source, whenever possible, This ensures vendor neutrality, transparency, and strategic control of the core digital infrastructure. This is in compliance with MeitY Policy 4 on open source. Open Standards, Open APIs, & Open Protocols The DIKSHA platform is ecosystem-driven, enabling an environment of innovation, and collaboration that is responsive to the needs of all its actors (e.g., teachers, students, parents, administrators and community members). Standards and speciﬁcations adopted allow ﬂexibility and choice to ecosystem actors while enabling effective coordination through a common vocabulary across various areas. Standards and speciﬁcations cover people, processes, data, interfaces and APIs. For DIKSHA: ● Open international and national standards have been adopted when available. The use of open standards reduces the barriers to participation by ecosystem actors and enables them to avoid vendor lock-ins. 4 MeitY open source policy - https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/ﬁles/policy_on_adoption_of_oss.pdf 20

=== PAGE 22 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note ● Provided/created open standards and speciﬁcations, when necessary, to enable portability and increased interoperability between solutions and systems. ● Open standards and speciﬁcations are regularly upgraded, new speciﬁcations are introduced as open source using experts from the community. ● All building blocks within the platform have implemented a set of Open APIs in compliance with MeitY Open API policy 5 . ● Designed open protocols (a set of API speciﬁcations along with a set of policies that are implemented by the ecosystem) that allow ecosystem solutions, services, assets to be discoverable and interoperable, without centralizing everything. Examples of protocols used within India’s digital infrastructure - eSign, Uniﬁed Payment Interface (UPI), Data Empowerment and Protection Architecture (DEPA) (used in Account Aggregator - AA, and Personal Health Records -PHR), Beckn Protocol used in recently launched Open Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC) and Uniﬁed Health Interface (UHI), etc. Open Data The Open Data Handbook 6 brieﬂy deﬁnes Open data as “data that can be freely used, re-used and redistributed by anyone - subject only, at most, to the requirement to attribute and sharealike.” Open data is crucial to interoperability. The most important aspects of the deﬁnition are related to ● Availability and Access : Data must be available as a whole, in a convenient and modiﬁable form and at no more than a reasonable reproduction cost and preferably downloadable over the internet. ● Re-use and Redistribution: Data must be provided under terms that permit re-use and redistribution including the intermixing with other datasets. ● Universal Participation: There should be no discrimination against ﬁelds of endeavour, or against persons or groups to use, re-use and redistribute data. For example, there cannot be ‘non-commercial’ restrictions to prevent ‘commercial’ use, or restrictions for use only for certain purposes (e.g. only in education). DIKSHA fully adheres to the NDEAR principle of open data and observability such that services are built to emit anonymised telemetry events to generate and aggregate open data by understanding system behaviour and supporting policy evolution. The open data is made available as ‘public good’ for access by all to enhance research, interventions, policies, solutions, and build an overall understanding of the effectiveness of the education system as per GoI’s National Data Sharing and Accessibility Policy. 7 7 National Data Sharing and Accessibility Policy (NDSAP) 6 Open Data Handbook - https://opendatahandbook.org/guide/en/what-is-open-data/ 5 MeitY Open API Policy - https://apisetu.gov.in/document-central/api-policy/ 21

=== PAGE 23 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Use of Commodity Computing The DIKSHA platform, used by the ecosystem to create varied solutions at scale, leverages diverse, ﬁt-for-purpose commodity computing components. Such components are cheaper and readily available from multiple providers and help to prevent vendor lock-in, to ensure reliability at scale and integration based on open standards. Heterogeneity Maintaining the NDEAR principle of using emerging technologies, DIKSHA is designed to allow a mix and match of diverse open and commoditized technologies. As a heterogeneously built infrastructure, DIKSHA platform is not heavily dependent on a particular technology or a technology provider. Cloud neutrality and multi-cloud deployment The tenets of evolvability, openness and the DIKSHA platform need to keep pace with the changes in technology as they evolve over the years. It has an architecture that easily accommodates new capabilities that may be needed as the ecosystem evolves and incorporates new technologies as they emerge. This enables systems to address technology risk and evolve heterogeneously. It leverages various technology innovations as and when they become viable and useful to improve education. In this direction, the architecture of the DIKSHA platform is built for cloud neutrality and multi-cloud deployment. ● Cloud neutrality means that the platform is built agnostic of any speciﬁc cloud vendor. DIKSHA uses different clouds for different environments, (e.g. development, testing, production, etc.) and is not tied to any speciﬁc cloud. ● Multi-cloud deployment means that DIKSHA services are deployed across multiple clouds and are connected via secure APIs. This enables the DIKSHA platform to take advantage of the unique beneﬁts of a multi-cloud approach such as running sensitive services on the Government of India (GoI) cloud and running services requiring heavy workloads on a GPU cloud. For example; large-scale analytics services using anonymized data running on a public cloud, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) services running on a GPU cloud, and core data services running on a Government of India cloud. 12. Data & Observability Data and built-in observability form the backbone of the DIKSHA platform. The platform implements event-driven telemetry and data aggregation services that power intelligent and data-driven continuous evolution of the platform and processes. 22

=== PAGE 24 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Such a data-driven design facilitates the implementation of various intelligent services such as content personalization based on learner persona, workﬂow monitoring, AI-driven recommendations, automated behavioural nudges, etc. Transparency, accuracy and reliability of data and analytics are ensured through a registry-driven approach, whereby data is logically organized as a shared, single source of truth. For interoperability and uniﬁcation of DIKSHA’s federated architecture with decentralised systems and applications have master codes and decentralised electronic registries that are made available via common APIs. For example; DIKSHA’s user and organization registries. 13. Interoperable DIKSHA is designed for interoperability via open APIs and open standards to support federated design principles so that various solutions built by the ecosystem are able to work in a uniﬁed manner. 14. Portable DIKSHA is designed for the portability of data, certiﬁcates, credentials, documents, content, etc. based on open standards. Portability is essential to ensure both data and assets are easily made available to various solutions and systems integrated into the platform. Open published speciﬁcations for all such assets and data are critical to ensure portability and reuse. 15. Generalized and Conﬁgurable DIKSHA’s core microservices are minimal (both data and functional minimalism), atomic, and generalized, allowing solution builders to ‘ reuse and extend ’ them to build contextual solutions. All services are designed in a ‘generalized’ manner to allow diverse use cases to be built on the same set of services. These generalized services ‘externalize’ their conﬁgurability and expose various conﬁgurations within the API itself to allow solution building across diverse contexts. 16. Designed for Solutioning DIKSHA’s federated architecture allows the platform to support an ecosystem-driven solutioning approach. It provides capabilities for actors in the ecosystem to create solutions, to learn, interact and collaborate. For example, depending on a State/Board requirement, the DIKSHA infrastructure enables rapid solutioning capabilities that allow actors to discover, understand, engage, experiment, innovate, and build on. DIKSHA has enabled asynchronous learning, self-evaluation and discussions that are critical to the core principles of learning such as readiness to learn, and provide regular practice for an effective learning experience. 23

=== PAGE 25 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note 17. Evolvable & Iterative Evolvability Evolvability is one of the core tenets advocated in NDEAR. The architecture and the building blocks of the digital infrastructure should not be thought of as a one-time exercise but rather as an evolving construct. Given the large and diverse ecosystem of actors and applications, all DIKSHA building blocks are clearly versioned, backward-compatible, and have well-deﬁned and transparent version-retirement policies. This ensures that various applications/systems depending on them can adopt and upgrade asynchronously at their pace and evolve along. The core principle of technology evolvability can be illustrated in the following manner: ● Neither should all capabilities be built on day one nor should it be assumed that capabilities built once may not change. Given this, the removal and addition of capabilities is a constant ongoing process of the platform design. ● Use strong platform governance principles to work with the ecosystem to evolve the platform while focusing on delivering better services to partners and users of the platform. ● Adaptability is the heart of evolution. The survival of the DIKSHA platform depends on its ability to rapidly adapt and evolve to changing requirements. Since the platform is built using building blocks, it is easily possible to exchange individual components without changing others. Iterative Evolvability also ensures that newer technologies, user interfaces, form factors, etc. can be easily brought in. The DIKSHA platform is architected to leverage various technology innovations (AI/ML, AR/VR) as and when they become viable and useful. When AI is leveraged, it is built to amplify human actors, eliminate biases, and assist in effective teaching/learning and management, rather than fully replacing humans. Translation of content in regional languages, speech recognition, personalisation, etc. is a critical part of this. A set of reusable AI services, open-source libraries, open-source models and data sets are built so that they can be leveraged and embedded within other building blocks. Replaceability Given the nature of an evolving platform architecture, it is assumed that all building blocks and micro-services are complete or ﬁt for purpose from the start. DIKSHA architecture is amenable to refactoring and/or replacing certain services with newer versions. The architectural ability to continually refactor/replace is the essence of evolvability. DIKSHA’s systems, processes, and tools are built to accommodate this. 24

=== PAGE 26 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Automation Evolution means constant change. It necessitates testing the system and its building blocks. Hence, to support rapid evolution, the system is designed to ensure continuous testing of the DIKSHA building blocks and services through automation. For example, it is critical to ensure that a new code change does not interrupt the working of a microservice that is already in use in multiple solutions, perhaps for millions of transactions. It is almost impossible for people to test for all the possible scenarios. DIKSHA architecture adopts extreme automation to guarantee backward compatibility, asynchronous adoption, and seamless upgrade of ecosystem applications and services beyond what is provided by the platform. Global Benchmark Since the design of the DIKSHA platform has the ability to adapt and evolve with changing requirements, it is important to constantly compare and learn from different platforms and similar large-scale networks that are designed/orchestrated across the world. Changing needs and new practices are identiﬁed from such learnings. The DIKSHA platform is assessed against relevant global benchmarks (e.g., design best practices across platforms and large-scale networks) on an ongoing basis for continuous improvement. 18. Trust by Design Adhering to NDEAR’s tenet of privacy, security and trust by design, DIKSHA has separate principles for each of these aspects. The DIKSHA platform is designed to: ● guarantee the integrity of actors (platform users) and assets (e.g., content, data) on the platform and fairness of all interactions, to imbue trust in the platform. ● ensure that the risks associated with the actors (e.g., users), assets (e.g., data) and interactions on the DIKSHA platform are addressed. ● Provide capabilities to authenticate users, encrypt data and share regular disclosures on various policies. For example, the veriﬁed registry of all the entities shall lead to higher accountability and trust. 19. Privacy by Design Given the highly conﬁdential nature of user data on the DIKSHA platform and its implementation on the cloud, adequate attention is given to protect user data from any form of unauthorized access, use, distortion and publishing. The design takes into consideration all relevant norms regarding sensitive information and personal information of individuals and adheres to appropriate data protection and privacy laws. 25

=== PAGE 27 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Security of services and data is designed into all DIKSHA building blocks using strong security design principles. Security is baked into all aspects of DIKSHA’s digital infrastructure. All solutions and services within DIKSHA adhere to appropriate data protection and privacy laws. 20. Security by Design The DIKSHA platform is designed such that the security of services and data is maintained using strong security design principles. The DIKSHA platform complies with all relevant GoI security norms and ensures the protection of platform assets, data, and any other information/assets that need to be protected. All aspects of data collection, transmission, processing, storage, and access are secured through encryption, access control, auditing, notiﬁcation, and other best practices. Building Blocks Overview Building block-driven design enables adaptability and conﬁguration of solutions of various kinds. Building blocks have to interoperate with other building blocks within the same system or across systems. A paper published by the Center for Global Development, Fast-Tracking Development: A Building Blocks Approach for Digital Public Goods 8 , provides a comprehensive view of the building block approach. Quoting from the paper: “ A building block is anything that can be used as a part or component to create something larger or more complex. In the physical world, building blocks are everywhere. They are characterized by three distinguishing features, as illustrated in the example of house construction: 1. They enable us to do something speciﬁc in diverse use cases. Bricks, roof tiles, paint, doors, window frames—each is a type of building block used for a particular purpose, but they can be used in a wide variety of construction projects, from housing to oﬃce buildings. 2. They can be combined for multiple purposes. Multiple bricks are stacked to create walls of different types and shapes of houses, each plastered and painted as desired by the owner. The same bricks are also used to build boundary walls and other structures. 8 Fast-Tracking Development: A Building Blocks Approach for Digital Public Goods - https://www.cgdev.org/publication/fast-tracking-development-building-blocks-approach-digital-public-goo ds 26

=== PAGE 28 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note 3. They compound in value when they are connected or combined for downstream solutions. The value of a house to the owners is much more than the sum of the bricks, cement, plaster, paint, etc. Characteristics of Building Blocks Digital building blocks have four important characteristics: ● Autonomous : Digital building blocks provide a standalone, reusable service or set of services. For example; GPS provides location coordinates autonomously; it solves the question “Where are you?” ● Generic capabilities: Digital building blocks are ﬂexible across use cases. For example; GPS location services enable access to a range of digital products like maps, food delivery, taxi aggregators, and even fraud detection. ● Interoperability: Digital building blocks combine, connect, and interact with other building blocks through speciﬁed communication protocols and interfaces. Application programming interfaces, or APIs, are software intermediaries that allow digital building blocks to talk to each other through published communication protocols. The communication protocols enable a digital exchange of information to use and access services. Interoperability also allows integration with legacy systems in countries and organizations, which is essential for solutions that need to work at scale. For example, a GPS kit can be ﬁtted into a nationwide ﬂeet of delivery trucks. ● Evolvability: Digital building blocks are not immune to changes in technology and context. They can be improved even while being used as part of solutions. The camera software can improve during the life of a smartphone without any signiﬁcant disruption to the user. Physical and Digital Building Blocks There are three ways in which digital building blocks function differently than physical building blocks. First is the digital exchange of information that is needed to enable a transaction. For example; withdrawing cash from an ATM is a physical process but it relies on several digital building blocks whereas paying for goods and services in cash does not. The second difference is in the marginal cost structure . The resources needed for physical blocks increase as the number of copies increases (it costs more to make a million bricks than a hundred). In contrast, the costs of duplicating digital blocks (such as protocols, registries, software, applications, etc.) or achieving economies of scope (expanding the uses of a building block) increase only marginally. For example, as in the case of GPS, the digital building block can 27

=== PAGE 29 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note be converted into a public good and access provided to everyone at little or even no cost with minimal resources needed for maintenance and operation of the building block itself. The third, related, difference is that a digital building block is multi-usable while a physical block can only be used in one application at one time. This makes it easier for the digital building block to serve as a public good, as we explore in the next section, reinforcing its non-excludable and non-rivalrous properties. Just as physical building blocks such as bricks and pipes come in various shapes, sizes, and forms, so too do digital building blocks. Types of Building Blocks Digital building blocks are classiﬁed into four types: 1) standard speciﬁcations and protocols, 2) software code, data sets and models 3) platforms, and 4) applications 28

=== PAGE 30 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 3: Types of Digital Building Blocks This classiﬁcation can be overlapping, and the distinctions need not be rigid. In practice, a building block is easier to identify by its purpose, scope, and use than by its form. Unless prevented by a speciﬁc barrier in its design or architecture, a digital building block allows for the freedom to use it together with other building blocks, standards and communication protocols to create more complex, multi-functional solutions. Digital public infrastructure are typically applications or platforms which offer a speciﬁc, ready-to-use service, while digital public goods are typically speciﬁcations, protocols and software code, datasets and models which are used to build a platform and/or an application. DIKSHA infrastructure, which includes the various DIKSHA applications and services is Digital Public Infrastructure. The underlying software and speciﬁcations that power DIKSHA, open content hosted on DIKSHA and the public data are Digital Public Goods. DIKSHA is powered by the open-source Sunbird which is a Digital Public Good. It is important to note that applications and platforms, having a runtime, (items 3 and 4 in Fig.3) collect data on users and usage. The collection, storage and use of this data require clear policies, guidelines and frameworks to protect personal information. Along with technical standards, it is important to have strong legal and regulatory frameworks governing the use of data to improve 29

=== PAGE 31 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note development outcomes as an essential complement to the ultimate goal of building digital public infrastructure at scale.” Building Block Approach in NDEAR The Ministry of Education (MoE), Government of India (GoI) proposed the National Digital Education Architecture (NDEAR) 2021 9 . The principles presented therein provide the technological framework to energize and catalyze the digital education ecosystem to create and deliver diverse, relevant, contextual, and innovative solutions that beneﬁt students, parents, teachers and educational communities. NDEAR aims to enable existing systems to upgrade and become interoperable while making available building blocks to create new tools and solutions to meet the educational requirements of India. The NDEAR report deﬁnes building blocks as “a package of self-contained functionalities deﬁned to meet business needs through a set of services made available via APIs and optionally via reference solutions. Building blocks have to interoperate with other building blocks within the same system or across systems.” NDEAR provides an approach to establish a Federated Architecture (FA) that is deﬁned in terms of building blocks. It picks out the common requirements of the education ecosystem and identiﬁes key building blocks that suit the purpose. The FA model is ideal for India’s federal governance setup and includes both public and private institutions. FA is a pattern in enterprise architecture that allows interoperability and information sharing between semi-autonomous, de-centrally organized entities, information technology systems and applications. Note: For details of the FA approach suggested in NDEAR, refer to the section, Federated Architecture and Building Blocks in the NDEAR Main Report . Building blocks are the essence of NDEAR. They are classiﬁed as: Building Block type Characteristics Core ● Built and managed as public goods ● Must adhere to the architectural principles of NDEAR ● Created and maintained at the National/State/ Board Level (in a federated structure) ● Not built by other ecosystem players ● Offered as hosted services/applications at appropriate 9 NDEAR Main report - https://www.ndear.gov.in/resources.html 30

=== PAGE 32 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Building Block type Characteristics administrative levels ● Enable interoperability and act as a glue between the rest of the building blocks and the solutions built on top. For example, electronic registries, identities, etc. Common ● Built and offered as a choice to all in the NDEAR ecosystem. ● Must also adhere to the architectural principles of NDEAR to ensure interoperability and solutions ● May also be created and maintained either at the Centre, State or Board levels. ● Also offered as hosted services or applications at the appropriate administrative level, but they are optional (unlike Core building blocks) ● The ecosystem may build alternative or enhanced versions of these building blocks to provide further choice ● The source code should be made available as a reference for other ecosystem players to rapidly build diverse applications on top Reference ● Built and offered only as “source code/data” to enable various ecosystem players (Government or private entities) to rapidly build their services/ applications. ● To be seen as “accelerators” ● Not offered as hosted services or applications. ● Available for download, use, enhancement, and customization through the NDEAR Portal ● The source code should also be made available as a reference to enable others to rapidly build diverse applications on top ● Should be well architected and documented for better reuse After detailed discussions with all stakeholders in the Indian education ecosystem and a careful study of existing systems, NDEAR has identiﬁed 36 minimum viable building blocks across 12 key building block categories. The following is a diagrammatic representation of the same: 31

=== PAGE 33 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 4: NDEAR Minimum Viable Set of Building Blocks Note: For details on the NDEAR Building Blocks, refer to the section Building Blocks of NDEAR in the NDEAR Main Report 10 . NDEAR & DIKSHA DIKSHA makes use of the NDEAR building block construct. The following diagram shows the building block categories that DIKSHA uses from NDEAR’s minimum viable set of building blocks. 10 NDEAR Main report - https://www.ndear.gov.in/resources.html 32

=== PAGE 34 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 5: NDEAR- DIKSHA Building Block Category Mapping DIKSHA is uses the following NDEAR building block categories: Open Standards DIKSHA uses open speciﬁcations and APIs for the following purposes: ● Credentialing and badging speciﬁcations - to provide certiﬁcates, etc. ● Question Markup Language (QuML) speciﬁcations - to create questions and question sets for practice and assessments ● Content and learning objects model speciﬁcations - to create and consume learning content ● Telemetry speciﬁcations - for built-in event-driven telemetry capabilities ● Language APIs - for content in multiple languages Technology DIKSHA intends to make use of the following building blocks from NDEAR’s Technology building block category: ● Open AI services - for English and Indian languages ● Language assets and services - to build common language assets across India’s diverse language base. For example, wordnets, generic ‘bhasha’ APIs, etc. 33

=== PAGE 35 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note ● Shared UX services - for content players, editors, events, discussion forums, chatbot, etc. Content DIKSHA uses all the building blocks recommended in NDEAR’s Content building block category for the following purpose: ● Contribution & curation - for creating, curating and crowdsourcing content and other resource assets ● Taxonomy and tagging services - to add metadata for all DIKSHA assets ● Language and translation services - to ensure that DIKSHA resources are available in multiple languages ● Discovery and personalization - to aid search and ﬁndability of assets as per personal preferences Learning DIKSHA has services for NDEAR’s Learning building block category for the following purpose: ● Learn, Do/Practice, Sense/Assess services - to enable different DIKSHA solutions for learning, help learn and administrate learning ● Interaction and collaboration services - to enable groups, discussion forums, etc. ● Credentialing and badging services - to create, mange, distribute and publish certiﬁcates and other credentials ● Learning infra, telemetry, and analytics services - to create and manage DIKSHA’s learning infrastructure, telemetry events and reports Reference Applications / Solutions Using NDEAR’s reference app building block construct, DIKSHA has learning reference apps and portals that are available in online and oﬄine mode and on the mobile. Open Data & Analytics DIKSHA adheres to the NDEAR Open Data & Analytics building block category construct for the following: ● Learning ● Content ● Interaction analytics 34

=== PAGE 36 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note DIKSHA & Sunbird The DIKSHA platform is built using underlying Sunbird digital blocks that are atomic, independent and reusable. DIKSHA uses multiple Sunbird building blocks as depicted in the following diagram and described in the table that follows. All building blocks are available as open-source software under MIT license and are part of Sunbird, a “Made in India, Made for the World” digital public good (DPG). All building block assets (source code, documentation, scripts, etc) are available on Github and are actively maintained by the Sunbird open-source community. Sunbird, Sunbird ED, and a few other building blocks are globally recognized by the international Digital Public Goods Alliance. Figure 6: DIKSHA Building Blocks 35

=== PAGE 37 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Building Block Name Description Sunbird ED Sunbird ED (or Sunbird for Education) is a reference solution developed for school education using reusable building blocks that enable key interactions of learning, capacity building, and administration. It is software developed to enable learning, capacity building, or professional development solutions. Sunbird coKreat Sunbird coKreat consists of a set of reusable tools and services to source various types of digital learning assets. It consists of a set of services and ready-to-use reference application that enables you to create, and source digital assets, curate them for speciﬁc needs and publish them for consumption. The web application comes with an inbuilt set of workﬂows for orchestrating the entire process. The unique power that Sunbird coKreat unleashes is enabling of “co-creation” using crowdsourcing as against the mere “creation” of assets. What this means is that you need not create all the digital assets that you require, within your organization. You can source them from other organizations and individuals who can provide it for you. This potentially makes the process highly scalable allowing you to access capacity and competency beyond your select set of users. Sunbird inQuiry Sunbird inQuiry is a building block that enables the setting up of question banks that can contain questions and question sets for various use cases such as practice, assessment, quiz, worksheet, survey, observations and many more. This building block consists of tools(editor and player) and services that enable the creation of question(s) and question set(s), conﬁguration of their behaviour, curation and publishing them for consumption, playing of question set(s) and emission of meaningful data. inQuiry works with primarily two objects - Question and Question Set - and uses the interoperable QuML Speciﬁcation. inQuiry can be extended for adaptive tests, gamiﬁed quizzes, rubric-driven assessments, competitions, data collection and other use-cases. It supports conﬁgurable behaviour of various kinds such as timer, certiﬁcate, hints, attempts, etc. Sunbird Knowlg Sunbird Knowlg module allows a powerful content and knowledge management capability for adopters to manage millions of content pieces… 36

=== PAGE 38 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Building Block Name Description Sunbird Knowlg has powerful asset and knowledge management capabilities that can be used to create, curate, approve, publish, organize and manage large numbers of assets, e.g. millions of documents, several hundred hours of videos, thousands of interactive content, quizzes etc. Assets created using Sunbird Knowlg are tagged using a multi-dimension tagging framework called Taxonomy. This enriches the metadata and aids in content discovery. Assets are served to users using Search and Discovery Service. The Search and Discovery take users' preferences and usage attributes like ratings into account while serving the user. Knowlg also has components (players) to consume content. Sunbird Lern Sunbird Lern consists of the core services to manage any user’s learning journey. It enables micro learning loops to be enabled along with other building blocks for interaction and collaboration. Sunbird Lern is a building block comprising core services that enable tracking of a user’s learning journey as well as enables user interactions and collaborations by providing various sets of tools and micro services. These capabilities can be leveraged by any adopter with requirements for measurement of learning progress, creation and management of cohorts/ batches of learners, as well as enabling collaboration capabilities such as Groups or Discussion forums. The Lern services are also employed for creation and management of user accounts and organizations within the Sunbird instance. This building block consists of several components, each of which provides speciﬁc functionalities. Key functional modules among these include: ● User authentication and account creation ● User Org Service: C-R-U-D operations for management of entities such as the user, Organization as well as Location - within the Sunbird system. ● Role management: User rights & system roles management ● Batch management and Progress Tracking ● Groups and Discussion Forums for collaboration ● Notiﬁcations for users Sunbird Observ Sunbird Obsrv brings together several components that come together to enable the ability to measure and observe various actions and activities. 37

=== PAGE 39 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Building Block Name Description Obsrv as a Sunbird building block comprises several components that come together to enable the ability to measure and observe various actions and activities carried out by the system/ users. Obsrv can be utilised as an independent building block that allows for measurement, or as part of a system that employs different Sunbird blocks to enable various workﬂows. It offers powerful data processing and aggregation infrastructure to process telemetry data generated by users & systems, validate the data, as well as aggregate and generate insights. It also has built-in open data cataloging and publishing capability. It is built keeping extensibility in mind, so that adopters have the ﬂexibility to adapt the telemetry and tools to their speciﬁc use-cases. Sunbird QuML Sunbird QuML (Question Markup Language) is a speciﬁcation for storage, rendering and distribution of questions and tests. It allows assessment materials to be authored and delivered on multiple systems interchangeably. Assessment has always played an important role in education. Most, if not all, types of formal education use some sort of assessment, typically including a ﬁnal exam to earn a grade, a degree, a license, or some other form of qualiﬁcation. Today, assessment is no longer restricted to grading at the end of an instruction (summative assessment), but it has been recognized that assessment is also useful for continuous monitoring & feedback (formative assessment) and guiding of the learning progress (means to learn), without being necessarily used for grading purposes. Sunbird RC Sunbird RC (Registry and Credential) is an open source software to rapidly build and deploy next-generation electronic registries and veriﬁable credentials including attestation and veriﬁcation ﬂows. Sunbird RC contains a set of frameworks to enable you to rapidly build next generation electronic registries and veriﬁable credentials including attestation and veriﬁcation ﬂows. This is an independently usable open source framework. This is part of the overall Sunbird open source initiative. Sunbird Telemetry Sunbird telemetry building block includes a set of open speciﬁcations and code to manage emission, collection, synchronization, validation, and processing of telemetry event stream. An open speciﬁcation for recording and measuring statistical data from real-world use of digital apps & platforms. 38

=== PAGE 40 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Building Block Name Description Sunbird UCI Sunbird UCI (Uniﬁed Communications Interface) is a system that empowers governments to create and manage conversations with citizens and with its own oﬃcials. Through UCI governments can seamlessly set-up simple and complex conversations using a multi-channel approach. UCI aims to democratize the use of different communication channels such as WhatsApp, Telegram, SMS, email for governance use cases through a standard conﬁgurable manner that is reusable and scalable across all governance use cases. Sunbird Saral Sunbird Saral is a handwriting recognition solution for physical assessment score-sheets (pen-and-paper tests). Saral can be viewed as an Optical Character Recognition (OCR) -plus application that is capable of doing OCR and can also understand the structure of the physical input. Saral data android application enables teachers to scan and upload the marks secured by the student in a given examination. Sunbird cQube Sunbird cQube is an analytical tool which helps integrating, analyzing and reporting the different data sources in predeﬁned formats and provide functionality to extend the solution for other data needs as well. cQube processes the education data typically available in Indian States. It generates predeﬁned metrics and creates visualizations of these metrics on a regular basis. Data ingestion to cQube happens through API. These metrics can be further drilled down to different geographical levels based on the need (e.g., State, District, Block, Cluster and School). Metrics are generated and visualizations are available for the generated metrics. Logged in users can view the visualization on the browser over the internet and metrics can also be downloaded for taking action or for further analysis. cQube provides ﬂexibility to extend to multiple use cases by using the base code and adding the speciﬁc use case as per the need. 39

=== PAGE 41 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Software or Speciﬁcations The GoI has policies like the MeitY Open Source Policy 11 and MeitY policy for open API. 12 that encourage and govern the use of open source software and speciﬁcations. In addition to the building blocks mentioned in the preceding section, DIKSHA also uses the following infrastructure and development open-source software: Open Source Used Website License Link to License Ansible https://github.com/a nsible/ansible GPL3 https://github.com/ ansible/ansible/blob /devel/COPYING OpenVPN https://openvpn.net/ 2 Commercial licenses for 10 users each Terraform https://github.com/h ashicorp/terraform Mozilla Public License, version 2.0 https://github.com/ hashicorp/terraform /blob/master/LICEN SE Terrahelp https://github.com/o pencredo/terrahelp Apache License 2.0 https://github.com/ opencredo/terrahelp /blob/master/LICEN SE Monit https://mmonit.com/ monit/dist/binary/ GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE Nexus http://www.sonatype. org/nexus/archived/ FREE PLUG-IN LICENSE, For Nexus OSS 2.x Go https://golang.org/pr oject/ BSD Style https://golang.org/L ICENSE 12 https://apisetu.gov.in/document-central/api-policy/ 11 MeitY open source policy - https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/ﬁles/policy_on_adoption_of_oss.pdf 40

=== PAGE 42 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License Kibana https://www.elastic.c o/products/kibana Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ elastic/kibana/blob/ master/LICENSE.m d Elastic Search https://www.elastic.c o/products/elasticse arch Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ elastic/elasticsearc h/blob/master/LICE NSE.txt Logstash https://www.elastic.c o/products/logstash Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ elastic/logstash/blo b/master/LICENSE Kafka http://kafka.apache.o rg/ Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ kafka-dev/kafka/blo b/master/LICENSE Samza http://samza.apache. org/ Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ apache/samza/blob /master/LICENSE Jenkins https://jenkins-ci.org/ MIT https://github.com/j enkinsci/jenkins/blo b/master/LICENSE.t xt Ruby https://www.ruby-lan g.org 2-clause BSDL https://www.ruby-la ng.org/en/about/lic ense.txt Ansible https://www.ansible.c om/ GPL v3 https://github.com/ ansible/ansible/blob /devel/COPYING Docker https://www.docker.c om/ Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ docker/docker/blob /master/LICENSE 41

=== PAGE 43 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License Java http://openjdk.java.ne t/ GNU GPL + Linking Exception http://openjdk.java.n et/legal/gplv2+ce.ht ml Hadoop https://hadoop.apach e.org/ Apache 2.0 http://www.apache. org/licenses/LICEN SE-2.0 Spinach https://github.com/c odegram/spinach MIT https://github.com/ codegram/spinach/ blob/master/LICEN SE Nginx https://www.nginx.co m/ BSD-like http://nginx.org/LIC ENSE Sensu https://github.com/se nsu/sensu https://github.com/se nsu-plugins MIT https://raw.githubus ercontent.com/sens u/sensu/master/MI T-LICENSE.txt Rabbitmq https://github.com/ra bbitmq/rabbitmq-serv er MOZILLA PUBLIC LICENSE https://github.com/r abbitmq/rabbitmq-s erver/blob/master/L ICENSE-MPL-Rabbit MQ InﬂuxDb https://github.com/in ﬂuxdata/inﬂuxdb/ MIT https://github.com/i nﬂuxdata/inﬂuxdb/b lob/master/LICENS E Redis https://github.com/a ntirez/redis BSD license https://github.com/ antirez/redis/blob/u nstable/COPYING Uchiwa https://github.com/se nsu/uchiwa MIT https://github.com/ sensu/uchiwa/blob/ master/LICENSE 42

=== PAGE 44 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License Grafana https://github.com/gr afana/grafana Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ grafana/grafana/blo b/master/LICENSE. md Burrow https://github.com/lin kedin/Burrow Apache 2.0 https://github.com/l inkedin/Burrow#lice nse jolokia https://github.com/rh uss/jolokia Apache 2.0 https://github.com/r huss/jolokia/blob/m aster/LICENSE kong https://github.com/M ashape/kong Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ Mashape/kong/blob /master/LICENSE Postgres https://www.postgres ql.org/ The PostgreSQL Licence https://www.postgre sql.org/about/licenc e/ aws-client https://aws.amazon.c om/cli/ Apache License, Version 2.0 wiremock http://wiremock.org/ Apache License, Version 2.0 elasticsearch rest client https://mvnrepository .com/artifact/org.ela sticsearch.client Apache License, Version 2.0 json schema validator https://mvnrepository .com/artifact/com.git hub.java-json-tools/js on-schema-validato Apache License, Version 2.0 Neo4J Enterprise Edition https://neo4j.com/op en-source/ AGPL https://neo4j.com/o pen-source/ Apache Cassandra http://cassandra.apa che.org/ Apache License v2.0 43

=== PAGE 45 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License MongoDB GNU AGPL v3.0 https://www.mongo db.com/community /licensing Redis https://redis.io BSD license https://redis.io/topic s/license Node.js https://nodejs.org/en / MIT License https://raw.githubus ercontent.com/node js/node/master/LIC ENSE AngularJS MIT License jQuery MIT License Akka Apache License v2.0 Pinterest Secor https://github.com/pi nterest/secor Apache License v2.0 Apache Spark http://spark.apache.o rg/ Apache License v2.0 Play Framework https://www.playfram ework.com/ Apache License v2.0 Cassandra Snapshotter https://github.com/tb arbugli/cassandra_sn apshotter BSD License https://github.com/t barbugli/cassandra_ snapshotter/blob/m aster/LICENSE.txt Apache Tomcat Apache License v2.0 Spring Framework Apache License v2.0 Apache Commons Apache License v2.0 44

=== PAGE 46 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License Flyberry Capital https://github.com/ﬂy berry-capital/scala-sl ack lift-json https://github.com/lif t/lift/tree/master/fra mework/lift-base/lift-j son Google Vision API https://cloud.google. com/vision/ https://cloud.googl e.com/terms/ https://cloud.google .com/terms/ FFmpeg https://ffmpeg.org/ GNU LGPL 2.1 https://www.ffmpeg .org/legal.html ImageMagick https://www.imagem agick.org/script/inde x.php https://www.image magick.org/script/ license.php https://www.image magick.org/script/li cense.php im4java http://im4java.source forge.net/ LGPL ImgScalr https://mvnrepository .com/artifact/org.img scalr/imgscalr-lib/4.2 Apache 2.0 Google APIs Apache License v2.0 Hibernate ORM Framework GNU LGPL 2.1 Docker Apache License v2.0 Maven Apache License v2.0 modelmapper Apache License, Version 2.0 45

=== PAGE 47 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License jackson-mapper-asl Apache License, Version 2.0 groovy-all Apache License, Version 2.0 guava Apache License, Version 2.0 jcsv Apache License, Version 2.0 gson Apache License, Version 2.0 joda-time Apache License, Version 2.0 querylang Apache License, Version 2.0 xercesImpl Apache License, Version 2.0 easymock Apache License, Version 2.0 json-path Apache License, Version 2.0 mongo-java-driver Apache License, Version 2.0 stax-api Apache License, Version 2.0 xpp3 Apache License, Version 2.0 xsdlib Apache License, Version 2.0 46

=== PAGE 48 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License jaxme-api Apache License, Version 2.0 dao-hibernate Apache License, Version 2.0 jasypt-hibernate4 Apache License, Version 2.0 jasypt-spring31 Apache License, Version 2.0 akka-actor_2.10 Apache License, Version 2.0 akka-remote_2.10 Apache License, Version 2.0 testng Apache License, Version 2.0 cglib-nodep Apache License, Version 2.0 poi Apache License, Version 2.0 disruptor Apache License, Version 2.0 aws-java-sdk Apache License, Version 2.0 hamcrest-all BSD License jsr250-api CDDL LIcense Version 1.0 javax.servlet-api CDDL LIcense Version 1.0 jstl CDDL LIcense Version 1.0 47

=== PAGE 49 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License javax.mail CDDL LIcense Version 1.0 aspectjrt Eclipse Public License - v 1.0 aspectjweaver Eclipse Public License - v 1.0 junit Eclipse Public License 1.0 mysql-connector-jav a GNU General Public License v3 neo4j GNU General Public License v3 gimap GNU General Public License v3 sesame-rio-rdfxml GNU LGPL pull-parser Indiana University Extreme! Lab Software License mockito-core MIT License jedis MIT License slf4j-api MIT License scribd MIT License scribe MIT License jsoup MIT License relaxngDatatype Open Source License jaxen The Werken Company License 48

=== PAGE 50 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License R https://www.r-project. org/ GNU Affero General Public License R studio https://www.rstudio.c om FOAS R packages https://cran.r-project. org https://cran.r-project .org/web/licenses/ Python https://www.python.o rg/ Python Software Foundation License https://www.python. org/download/relea ses/2.7/license/ gensim https://radimrehurek. com/gensim/ GNU LGPLv2.1 license speech recognition https://pypi.python.or g/pypi/SpeechRecog nition/ BSD license Jupyter Notebook http://jupyter.org/ BSD license LibFM 1.4.2 http://www.libfm.org/ GPL v3 license Apache Zeppelin https://zeppelin.apac he.org/ Apache License, Version 2.0 Plotly MIT license https://plot.ly/javas cript/open-source-a nnoun Google cloud api https://cloud.google. com/apis/docs/overv iew https://cloud.google .com/terms/ tagme api https://services.d4sci ence.org/web/tagme /documentation 49

=== PAGE 51 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License Apache Software License, Version 2.0 SQLite https://www.sqlite.o rg/copyright.html Junit 4.1.2 Eclipse Public License - v 1.0 W3C HTML5 speciﬁcations Licensing will be required from Ekstep (or under whose name the game will be published) http://unity3d.com/l egal/eula Crosswalk https://crosswalk-proj ect.org/documentatio n/about/faq.html BSD License Sthetho https://github.com/fa cebook/stetho/blob/ master/LICENSE BSD License xampp http://www.apache. org/licenses/LICEN SE-2.0 notepad++ https://notepad-plus- plus.org/ GNU general public license http://www.gnu.org/ copyleft/gpl.html paint.net http://www.getpaint.n et/index.html GNU general public license http://www.getpaint. net/license.html audacity http://audacityteam.o rg/ http://creativecomm ons.org/licenses/by /3.0/legalcode 50

=== PAGE 52 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License Piwik.org Analytics http://piwik.org GNU general public license https://en.wikipedia. org/wiki/GNU_Gene ral_Public_License Joomla http://joomla.org GNU general public license v2 https://docs.joomla. org/Joomla_License s PHP https://php.net PHP License v3.01 https://secure.php.n et/license/ Apache HTTP Server https://httpd.apache. org/ Apache Software License, Version 2.0 http://www.apache. org/licenses/ Morris Charts http://morrisjs.github. io/morris.js/index.ht ml Licensed under the BSD-2-Clause License. Mustache JS https://mustache.gith ub.io/ MIT https://github.com/j anl/mustache.js/blo b/master/LICENSE PHPUnit https://phpunit.de/ CC Attribution 3.0 https://phpunit.de/ manual/current/en/ appendixes.copyrig ht.html PhantomJS http://phantomjs.org/ BSD https://github.com/ ariya/phantomjs/blo b/master/LICENSE. BSD Jasmine MIT https://github.com/j asmine/jasmine/blo b/master/MIT.LICEN SE Sweet Alerts http://t4t5.github.io/s weetalert/ MIT https://github.com/t 4t5/sweetalert/blob /master/LICENSE 51

=== PAGE 53 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License EasySocial https://stackideas.co m/easysocial GNU general public license EasyDiscuss https://stackideas.co m/easydiscuss GNU general public license JFB Connect https://www.sourcec oast.com/joomla-fac ebook/ GNU general public license v2 http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl-2.0.htm l Admin Tools Pro https://www.akeebab ackup.com/products/ admin-tools.html GNU General Public License version 3 http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl-3.0.en. html EasyBlog https://stackideas.co m/easyblog GNU general public license RS Tickets Pro https://www.rsjoomla .com/joomla-extensio ns/joomla-help-desk. html GNU General Public License version 3 http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl-3.0.en. html T3 Framework for Joomla! http://t3-framework.o rg GNU general public license v2 http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl-2.0.htm l Markdown Editor https://simular.co/lyr a/extensions/asikart- markdown.html GNU general public license v2 http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl-2.0.htm l CDN For Joomla https://www.regularla bs.com/extensions/c dnforjoomla GNU general public license v2 http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl-2.0.htm l JLike https://techjoomla.co m/products/j-like GNU general public license v2 http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl-2.0.htm l com_subusers GNU general public license v2 http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl-2.0.htm l 52

=== PAGE 54 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License com_emailbeautiﬁer https://techjoomla.co m/products/email-be autiﬁer GNU general public license v2 http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl-2.0.htm l JA Extension Manger https://www.joomlart. com/joomla/extensio ns/ja-extensions-man ager GNU/GPL JCE editor https://www.joomlac ontenteditor.net/ GNU/GPL 2 or later http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/old-license s/gpl-2.0.html OSmap Free https://www.joomlas hack.com/joomla-ext ensions/osmap/ GNU/GPL http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl.html JA slideshow https://www.joomlart. com/downloads/joo mla-extensions/ja-sli deshow-lite/ GNU/GPL http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl.html JA Social II https://www.joomlart. com/joomla/templat es/ja-social-ii Copyrighted Commercial Software https://www.joomlar t.com/joomlart/lice nses jPanel http://bygiro.com/en/ extensions/modules/j panel GNU/GPL 2 or later http://www.gnu.org/ copyleft/gpl.html All videos http://www.joomlawo rks.net/extensions/fr ee/allvideos GNU/GPL http://www.gnu.org/ copyleft/gpl.html plg_system_deployt ools GNU/GPL http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl.html Scroll To CK https://www.joomlac k.fr/en/joomla-extens ions/scroll-to-ck GNU/GPL http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl.html 53

=== PAGE 55 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License System - LLFJ - Lazy Load for Joomla! https://joomla-extensi ons.kubik-rubik.de/do wnloads/llfj-lazy-load- for-joomla GNU/GPL http://www.gnu.org/ licenses/gpl.html izimodal http://izimodal.marce lodolce.com/ Apache License 2.0 https://github.com/ dolce/iziModal/blob /master/LICENSE InviteX https://techjoomla.co m/products/invitex GNU/GPL https://techjoomla.c om/about-techjooml a/license Options manager https://db8.eu/option s-manager GPLv2 or later Codeception https://codeception.c om MIT License https://github.com/ Codeception/Codec eption/blob/2.4/LIC ENSE Composer https://getcomposer. org MIT License https://github.com/ composer/compose r/blob/master/LICE NSE jQuery rateYo plugin http://rateyo.fundooc ode.ninja MIT License https://github.com/ prrashi/rateYo/blob/ master/LICENSE chart.js http://www.chartjs.or g/ MIT License https://github.com/ chartjs/Chart.js/blo b/master/LICENSE. md underscoreJs http://underscorejs.or g/ MIT License http://www.opensou rce.org/licenses/mit -license.html 54

=== PAGE 56 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License xml2json Apache 2.0 http://www.apache. org/licenses/LICEN SE-2.0 typeahead.js https://github.com/tw itter/typeahead.js/ MIT License https://github.com/t witter/typeahead.js/ blob/master/LICEN SE lodash https://lodash.com/ MIT License https://raw.githubus ercontent.com/loda sh/lodash/4.17.4/LI CENSE ajaxq https://github.com/F oliotek/ajaxq MIT License https://github.com/ Foliotek/AjaxQ/blob /master/LICENSE x-editable jquery plugin https://github.com/vit alets/x-editable MIT License https://github.com/ vitalets/x-editable/b lob/develop/LICENS E-MIT tokenizer jquery plugin https://github.com/ze llerda/Tokenize BSD 3-Clause "New" or "Revised" License https://github.com/ zellerda/Tokenize/bl ob/master/LICENSE toaster jquery plugin https://github.com/C odeSeven/toastr MIT License https://github.com/ CodeSeven/toastrbl ob/master/LICENSE Recordmp3js https://github.com/A udior/Recordmp3js MIT License https://github.com/ Audior/Recordmp3j s/blob/master/LICE NSE moment.js https://github.com/m oment/moment/ MIT License https://github.com/ moment/moment/bl ob/develop/LICENS E 55

=== PAGE 57 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License php jwt https://github.com/ﬁr ebase/php-jwt BSD 3 https://github.com/f irebase/php-jwt/blo b/master/LICENSE jquery tree plugin https://www.jstree.co m MIT License https://github.com/ vakata/jstree/blob/ master/LICENSE-MI T jquery ui http://jqueryui.com MIT License jQuery LoadingOverlay https://github.com/g asparesganga/jquery- loading-overlay MIT License https://github.com/ gasparesganga/jqu ery-loading-overlay/ blob/master/LICEN SE cropperjs https://github.com/fe ngyuanchen/cropperj s MIT License https://github.com/f engyuanchen/cropp erjs/blob/master/LI CENSE bootstrap-tokenﬁeld https://github.com/sli ptree/bootstrap-token ﬁeld MIT License https://github.com/ sliptree/bootstrap-t okenﬁeld/blob/mast er/LICENSE.md bootstrap-multisele ct https://github.com/d avidstutz/bootstrap- multiselect Apache License, Version 2.0 https://github.com/ davidstutz/bootstra p-multiselect/blob/ master/LICENSE.m d bootstrap-slider https://github.com/se iyria/bootstrap-slider MIT License https://github.com/ seiyria/bootstrap-sli der/blob/master/LI CENSE.md 56

=== PAGE 58 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License grunt https://gruntjs.com/ MIT https://github.com/ gruntjs/grunt/blob/ master/LICENSE gulp https://gulpjs.com/ MIT https://github.com/ gulpjs/gulp/blob/m aster/LICENSE karma https://karma-runner. github.io/1.0/index.ht ml MIT https://github.com/ karma-runner/karm a/blob/master/LICE NSE phantomjs http://phantomjs.org/ BSD https://github.com/ ariya/phantomjs/blo b/master/LICENSE. BSD semantic-ui https://semantic-ui.c om/ MIT https://github.com/ Semantic-Org/Sema ntic-UI/blob/master /LICENSE.md lodash https://lodash.com/ MIT https://raw.githubus ercontent.com/loda sh/lodash/4.17.4/LI CENSE xmlbuilder MIT http://spdx.org/licen ses/MIT fabric http://fabricjs.com/ MIT https://github.com/ kangax/fabric.js/blo b/master/README. md#mit-license uuid MIT http://spdx.org/licen ses/MIT 57

=== PAGE 59 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License async https://www.npmjs.c om/package/uuid-v4 MIT https://github.com/ caolan/async/blob/ master/LICENSE ng-dialog https://github.com/lik eastore/ngDialog MIT https://github.com/l ikeastore/ngDialog# license oclazyload https://github.com/o combe/ocLazyLoad MIT https://github.com/ ocombe/ocLazyLoa d/blob/master/LICE NSE.md createjs http://www.createjs.c om/ MIT http://www.opensou rce.org/licenses/mit -license.html creatinejs http://creatine.guinea shots.com/ MIT http://www.opensou rce.org/licenses/mit -license.html xml2json Apache 2.0 http://www.apache. org/licenses/LICEN SE-2.0 eventbus http://greenrobot.org/ eventbus/ Apache 2.0 http://www.apache. org/licenses/LICEN SE-2.0 Simple JavaScript Inheritance(class) https://johnresig.com /blog/simple-javascri pt-inheritance/ MIT http://www.opensou rce.org/licenses/mit -license.html jasmine https://jasmine.githu b.io/ MIT http://www.opensou rce.org/licenses/mit -license.html angularjs http://angularjs.org MIT http://www.opensou rce.org/licenses/mit -license.html 58

=== PAGE 60 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License ionic http://ionicframework .com/ MIT http://www.opensou rce.org/licenses/mit -license.html ngcordova http://ngcordova.com / MIT http://www.opensou rce.org/licenses/mit -license.html jquery https://jquery.com/ MIT http://www.opensou rce.org/licenses/mit -license.html underscoreJs http://underscorejs.or g/ MIT http://www.opensou rce.org/licenses/mit -license.html jquery easing http://gsgd.co.uk/san dbox/jquery/easing/ BSD Crosswalk https://crosswalk-proj ect.org/ MIT http://www.opensou rce.org/licenses/mit -license.html jsdoc https://github.com/js doc3/jsdoc Apache 2.0 https://github.com/j sdoc3/jsdoc/blob/ master/LICENSE.m d md5 https://code.google.c om/archive/p/crypto-j s/downloads BSD https://code.google. com/archive/p/cryp to-js/wikis/License. wiki audiosprite https://github.com/to nistiigi/audiosprite MIT https://github.com/t onistiigi/audiosprite /blob/master/LICEN SE 59

=== PAGE 61 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License toastr http://www.jqueryscri pt.net/other/Highly-C ustomizable-jQuery-T oast-Message-Plugin- Toastr.html MIT http://www.jquerysc ript.net/other/Highly -Customizable-jQuer y-Toast-Message-Pl ugin-Toastr.html jquery.bookshelfslid er http://www.editions-t erre-de-lumiere.com/ ps_1491/modules/bl ockbookshelf/_docu mentation/bookshelf _slider_help.html BSD angular-ui-sortable https://github.com/a ngular-ui/ui-sortable MIT https://github.com/ angular-ui/ui-sortabl e/blob/master/LICE NSE videoJs https://github.com/vi deojs Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ videojs/video.js/blo b/master/LICENSE EPUB https://github.com/fu turepress/epub.js MIT https://raw.githubus ercontent.com/tildei o/rsvp.js/master/LI CENSE JSZIP https://github.com/St uk/jszip MIT https://github.com/ Stuk/jszip/blob/mas ter/LICENSE.markd own PDFJS https://github.com/m ozilla/pdf.js Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ mozilla/pdf.js/blob/ master/LICENSE Fine Uploader http://ﬁneuploader.co m MIT https://github.com/ FineUploader/ﬁne-u ploader/blob/develo p/LICENSE 60

=== PAGE 62 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License prismjs http://prismjs.com/ MIT https://github.com/ PrismJS/prism/blob /gh-pages/LICENSE CKEditor https://ckeditor.com/ GPL https://ckeditor.com /terms-of-use#licen ses jQuery.scrollTo https://github.com/ﬂ esler/jquery.scrollTo MIT https://github.com/f lesler/jquery.scrollT o/blob/master/LICE NSE angular-timeago https://github.com/ya ru22/angular-timeago MIT https://github.com/ yaru22/angular-time ago/blob/master/LI CENSE micromarkdown https://github.com/si monwaldherr/microm arkdown.js/ MIT https://github.com/ SimonWaldherr/mic romarkdown.js/blob /master/LICENSE.m d ng-token-ﬁeld https://github.com/lu caslouca/ng-token-ﬁe ld MIT https://github.com/l ucaslouca/ng-token- ﬁeld/blob/master/LI CENSE jqueryui http://jqueryui.com/ MIT http://jqueryui.com/ Spectrum Colorpicker https://github.com/b grins/spectrum MIT https://github.com/ bgrins/spectrum/bl ob/master/LICENSE jquery fancytree https://github.com/m ar10/fancytree/ MIT https://github.com/ mar10/fancytree/wi ki/LicenseInfo 61

=== PAGE 63 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License jPlayer http://jplayer.org/ MIT https://github.com/j player/jPlayer/blob/ master/MIT-LICENS E.txt wavesurfer https://github.com/ka tspaugh/wavesurfer.j s CC-BY-3.0 https://github.com/ katspaugh/wavesurf er.js/blob/master/LI CENSE Lamejs https://github.com/zh uker/lamejs LGPL https://github.com/ zhuker/lamejs/blob/ master/LICENSE Please-wait https://github.com/P athgather/please-wait MIT https://github.com/ Pathgather/please- wait/blob/master/LI CENSE izitoast http://izitoast.marcel odolce.com/ Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ dolce/iziToast/blob/ master/LICENSE font-awesome http://fontawesome.i o/ GPL http://fontawesome. io/license/ Ajv: Another JSON Schema Validator https://github.com/e poberezkin/ajv MIT https://github.com/ epoberezkin/ajv/blo b/master/LICENSE gulp-uglify https://github.com/te rinjokes/gulp-uglify MIT https://github.com/t erinjokes/gulp-uglify /blob/master/LICEN SE.md Web Font Loader https://github.com/ty pekit/webfontloader Apache 2.0 https://github.com/t ypekit/webfontloade r/blob/master/LICE NSE 62

=== PAGE 64 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License Mousetrap https://github.com/cc ampbell/mousetrap Apache 2.0 https://github.com/ ccampbell/mousetr ap/blob/master/LIC ENSE dragula https://github.com/b evacqua/dragula MIT https://github.com/ bevacqua/dragula/b lob/master/license mathquill https://github.com/m athquill/mathquill/ MPL 2.0 http://mozilla.org/M PL/2.0/ KaTeX https://github.com/K han/KaTeX MIT http://opensource.or g/licenses/MIT Android Support library https://developer.and roid.com/topic/librari es/support-library/ind ex.html Apache 2.0 ANdroid support CardView https://developer.and roid.com/topic/librari es/support-library/pa ckages.html Apache 2.0 Multidex https://developer.and roid.com/studio/build /multidex.html Apache 2.0 Google Firebase Cloud Messaging https://ﬁrebase.googl e.com/ Apache 2.0 Google Firebase Analytics https://ﬁrebase.googl e.com/ Apache 2.0 Google Location service Apache 2.0 Json Scema validator https://github.com/ja va-json-tools/json-sc hema-validator Apache 2.0 63

=== PAGE 65 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License Stetho https://github.com/fa cebook/stetho BSD 3-clause Stetho Okhttp https://github.com/fa cebook/stetho BSD 3-clause .Find bugs https://github.com/ﬁ ndbugsproject/ﬁndbu gs Apache 2.0 Espresso https://developer.and roid.com/training/tes ting/espresso/index. html Apache 2.0 Support Annotation https://developer.and roid.com/reference/a ndroid/support/annot ation/package-summ ary.html Apache 2.0 UIautomator https://developer.and roid.com/training/tes ting/ui-automator.htm l Apache 2.0 Glide https://github.com/b umptech/glide BSD, part MIT and Apache 2.0 Crashlytics https://try.crashlytics. com/ Apache 2.0 Espresso https://google.github. io/android-testing-su pport-library/docs/es presso/ Apache 2.0 okHttp https://github.com/s quare/okhttp Apache 2.0 64

=== PAGE 66 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Open Source Used Website License Link to License joda-time https://github.com/J odaOrg/joda-time Apache 2.0 Event bus http://greenrobot.org/ eventbus/ Apache 2.0 Google play services Apache 2.0 Awaitility https://github.com/a waitility/awaitility Apache 2.0 Gson https://github.com/g oogle/gson Apache 2.0 65

=== PAGE 67 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Part B DIKSHA Operations 66

=== PAGE 68 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note DIKSHA Operations Overview Typically, DIKSHA operations can be categorized into six stages and are cyclical in nature. Each stage follows its own processes the details of which are elaborated in the sections that follow. The following is a high-level visual representation of the life cycle for DIKSHA operations. Figure 7: Six Stages of DIKSHA Operations 67

=== PAGE 69 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Release Cycle DIKSHA uses Sunbird Ed as its underlying software, Hence the build and release cycle of DIKSHA is dependent on the Sunbird Ed build and release cycles. Sunbird Ed uses an agile framework to plan and execute its version releases. Each release cycle is typically executed over seven weeks. Most of the release deliverables are maintained in tools such as JIRA, Conﬂuence and GitHub. Figure 8: DIKSHA Release Cycle 68

=== PAGE 70 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Build A typical Sunbird version release follows a four (4) stage build process. The four stages of the build process are: ● Scope ● Develop ● Consolidate ● Communicate Each stage is elaborated in the sections that follow. Figure 9: Four Stages of Sunbird Release Build Process Scope As part of release planning, the teams decide the scope of what will be delivered as part of a release. Items are picked based on the product roadmap from the bin list or backlog which is maintained in JIRA. As part of the Scope phase, the team produces the following artifacts: ● Epics and Stories ● Delivery Plan Epics and Stories As per Agile methodology, the functional, non-functional and software requirement speciﬁcations are detailed as Epics and Stories. 69

=== PAGE 71 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Note: For the epics and stories of Sunbird Ed, refer to Appendix A - Functional and Nonfunctional Requirements. Telemetry Instrumentation As part of the build process, the team decides the telemetry events that need to be instrumented for the functionality/feature that is being developed. At this stage, its important to understand ‘what is telemetry?’ Telemetry is a term used for technologies that automatically record and measure statistical data from real-world use and forward it to IT systems in a remote location for further analysis and study. Telemetry is used in a myriad of industries from tracking spacecrafts, medical monitoring, tracking wildlife, and so on. ‘Events’ are broad, human-readable actions that can be tracked as a string. Events are used to categorize telemetry data.They are the basic unit for analytics and help identify user navigation or ﬂow. The concept of telemetry events is to identify: Who did what, on what, and where, using what, in relation to what? Every event has the following sections and corresponding ﬁelds to capture the data: Section Description Attributes About About the event ets mid Who About the actor uid did Verb or action eid on what Action on what object? content_id content_ver and where Context of the action env did sid channel pdata using what Using which tool? ? In relation to Related to which action? cdata The objective of telemetry is to assist in product, application or service development, modiﬁcation or security. It works as a framework. Telemetry enables automatic collection of data from real-world, real-time use. 70

=== PAGE 72 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Typically, there are four levels of telemetry: ● Security ● Basic ● Enhanced ● Full The level of data collected is a discrete decision of an organization or business. Analysis of this data offers insights into product and user behaviour and usage patterns, driving business decisions and research outcomes. You can program your telemetry analytics to suit your requirements. DIKSHA’s telemetry service has Full level telemetry. Note: 1. For detailed information on Telemetry speciﬁcations and events, refer to Appendix C - Telemetry. 2. For detailed information on design of datasets and data exhausts, refer to Appendix D - Design Note on Datasets and Data Exhausts. Delivery Plan The scope is ﬁnalized based on inputs received from different adopters. On scope ﬁnalization, the team shares a Delivery Plan document. Note: For delivery plan, refer to Appendix B - Delivery Plan Status Dashboard. Develop The Develop stage of the release cycle is the longest and most crucial phase of the Build process. As part of this phase, teams design and develop the solution as per the deﬁned scope, and test it in the development environment. In this phase the team produces multiple deliverables like: ● Code ● Release Brief The following subsections describe each deliverable brieﬂy. Coding Repositories Teams develop software to ensure that capabilities stated in the stories become a reality. As mentioned earlier, Sunbird building blocks are the underlying foundation for the DIKSHA platform. All code is maintained on multiple Sunbird GitHub repositories. Note: For a list of all the Sunbird repositories on GitHub that house DIKSHA code, refer to Appendix T - List of code repositories . 71

=== PAGE 73 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Consolidate The Consolidate phase of the Build process involves merging the code from individual areas to the master branch and unit testing it. Communicate The Communicate phase involves informing all internal and external stakeholders about production ready documentation. Documentation has a process and lifecycle of its own that runs parallel to the Develop and Consolidate phases. The following is a visual representation of the documentation process: 72

=== PAGE 74 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 10: Release Documentation Process 73

=== PAGE 75 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Note: For details on the documentation process, refer to Appendix F - Release Documentation Process. The team produces the following documentation as part of the communicate phase: ● Release Notes ● Release Upgrade Document ● Product Functionality User Manuals ● API Reference Documentation Note: 1. For DIKSHA release notes, refer to Appendix E - DIKSHA Release Notes. 2. For details on the release upgrade document, refer to Appendix G - DIKSHA Release Upgrade Document. 3. For details of the Product Functionality User Manuals, refer to Appendix H - DIKSHA User Manual. 4. For details of the API reference documentation, refer to Appendix I - API Reference Documentation. Test After the Build stage is complete, the product enters the test phase. This phase is crucial to guarantee the quality of the product. The team does system testing, regression testing and acceptance testing. Quality Assurance Process Test cases are written to ensure that the features developed adhere to all the functional and non-functional requirements. The test cases are reviewed and executed The following is a visual representation of the test case execution process 74

=== PAGE 76 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 11: Test Case Execution Process 75

=== PAGE 77 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Note: For details on the quality assurance process, refer to Appendix J - DIKSHA Quality Assurance Process. Root Cause Analysis (RCA) At the end of each release the team analyzes the root cause of defects and decides on quality metrics to be achieved for the subsequent release. The following is a visual representation of the RCA process. Figure 12: RCA Process Flow Note: For details on the root cause analysis process, refer to Appendix K - DIKSHA RCA Process. Test Execution Plan Once a Sunbird release happens, it is deployed in a preprod environment of DIKSHA and DIKSHA UAT is executed as per a plan. This typically happens in weeks six (6) and seven (7) of the release cycle. Note: For a sample of the test execution plan, refer to Appendix L - DIKSHA UAT Execution sheet. Test cases Test cases are written speciﬁcally to test for DIKSHA functionality. Test cases are executed as per the test execution plan. Note: For sample test cases, refer to Appendix M - Regression Test case suite for DIKSHA NF & Circle Regression. 76

=== PAGE 78 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Deploy After the Test phase, DIKSHA is deployed to production. The team follows instructions either from the DIKSHA Release Upgrade document (to upgrade from a lower version to the current version) or the DIKSHA Installation Guide (for a fresh installation) and makes use of various software, scripts and tools to deploy DIKSHA for the portal, mobile or oﬄine desktop. Note: 1. For details on the software used, refer to Part A, section DIKSHA Software List. 2. For details on deployment scripts, refer to Part B, section Build Process, subsection Coding Repositories. DIKSHA Deployment Architecture DIKSHA’s deployment architecture is best described using the following diagrams: Figure 13: Deployment view - Microservices 77

=== PAGE 79 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 14: Deployment view - Data Platform Figure 15: Deployment view - Cloud Blueprint 78

=== PAGE 80 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 16: Deployment view - Network Blueprint 79

=== PAGE 81 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note DIKSHA Release Deployment Management Process Figure 17: DIKSHA Release Deployment Management Process The preceding diagram is a visual representation of the deployment process. The deployment process is managed using various documents and trackers at different stages in the process. For example; the DevOps Tracker, Release Notes, etc. The Installation Guide provides complete instructions on how to deploy and conﬁgure DIKSHA. Note: 1. For DIKSHA release notes, refer to Appendix E - DIKSHA Release Notes. DIKSHA Release Deployment Environments DIKSHA is deployed in multiple environments. The deployment journey is represented in the following diagram: 80

=== PAGE 82 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 18: DIKSHA Release Deployment Management - Environment Flow 81

=== PAGE 83 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note DIKSHA Release Deployment Milestones Milestone Gate No. Gate Category Qualiﬁcation Owner Measurable Output 1 Sunbird Release Latest Release of Sunbird and available in Public Domain Sunbird DevOps Sunbird Deployment Details, Release Documentation, API Documentation 2 Preprod Deployment Tracker Deployment Tracker with Tags to Build and Deploy Diksha NOC & Implementation Preprod Deployment Tracker 3 Release in Preprod Successful Roll-out Diksha NOC & Implementation Successful Deployment 4 Testing in Preprod Testing Sign-off from QA Diksha QA Preprod Sign-off Mail 5 Infrastructure Sign-off in Preprod Infrastructure and Pipeline Monitoring and Sign-off Diksha NOC & Data Team Preprod Release Dashboard & Data Team Feedback 6 Production Deployment Tracker and Review Deployment Tracker for Production with latest tags and Activity Plan (Execution steps – SOP) Diksha NOC Sunbird DC Review and Production Deployment Tracker 7 Stakeholder Communication Communication mail Diksha Support Communication mail on activity and any downtime (if applicable) 8 Production Deployment Successful Roll-out Diksha NOC & Implementation Successful Deployment 9 Testing and Observation in production Testing Conﬁrmation and System Observation Diksha NOC & QA Deployment status and QA Report 10 Retrospective Things went well, Can be done better, Issues/Reports Diksha NOC, Implementation and QA Learnings and MO 82

=== PAGE 84 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Deploy Screenshots Figure 19: Jenkins jobs list to deploy the microservices running in kubernetes cluster Figure 20: Jenkins parameters to deploy player microservice 83

=== PAGE 85 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 21: List of Jenkins jobs to provision and conﬁgure data pipeline services 84

=== PAGE 86 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Monitor NOC Monitoring Scope Figure 22: Scope of NOC Monitoring Emergency Process Emergency Approach ● Plan A – Normal Emergency Restoration. Respond to the issue to look for the optimal solution - Primary ● Plan B – Alternate Approach for Restoration ● Plan C – Blocked and needs time. Get help from the front facing team to manage the communication Incidents that Qualify for Emergency The following are broad categories that are to be considered as P1: ● Any Impact on Azure Region (Production environment is in Central India Region ● Any impact to Azure services (PostgreSQL, Kubernetes Services) 85

=== PAGE 87 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note ● Azure Impact to several Storage accounts (Blobs and Disk – As if Disk is not reachable, application’s may not perform properly) ● Frequent Service Restarts for containerized and non-containerized application ● Services not starting Up for containerized and non-containerized application ● Any network issue on Load Balancers ● Database Not Reachable ● Performance Degrade of API’s (Continuous signs of degradation identiﬁcation from on ﬁeld issues and equivalent reﬂection in Latency) ● 5xx Error > x% (Continuously for 15 mins) ● 4xx Error > x% (Continuously for 15 mins) ● Pipeline Not processed for more than 8 hrs ● Any User related Jobs Failures and not responding to restarts ● TPS spike (usage) ● Service down (denial of service) ● Network services down ● Accessing service issues (P1, bugs) Incident Management Process Figure 23: Incident Management Process 86

=== PAGE 88 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Flow Transition Process Figure 24: Flow Transition Process Critical Dashboards - Grafana Dashboard Name Dashboard Link Purpose Dashboard-All https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/000000006/d ashboard-all?orgId=1&refresh=30s For TPS, Error, Load Average and Disk Monitoring API Manager https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/qRnVoj7Mz/a pi-manager?orgId=1&refresh=1m For API - Request, Success, Error, Latency, Request / response sizes Lag Dashboard https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/vfdQRdtMz/la g-dashboard?orgId=1&from=now-15m&to=no w&refresh=1m Ingestion cluster, DP Flink, KP Flink, Samza Jobs, Druid, Secor Lag Availability 87

=== PAGE 89 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Dashboard Name Dashboard Link Purpose Data Pipeline Metrics Flink https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/YngLt0kGz/d ata-pipeline-metrics-ﬂink?orgId=1&refresh=5 m&from=now-1h&to=now DP Flink Jobs -- Success , Throughput and Lag with other parameters KP Flink Job metrics https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/YngLt0kG/kp- ﬂink-jobs-metrics?orgId=1&from=now-1h&to= now KP Flink Jobs -- Success , Throughput and Lag with other parameters LP Pipeline Lag https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/9I50utWZz2/l p-pipeline-lag?orgId=1&from=now-15m&to=no w&refresh=5m Samza Jobs -- Lag with other parameters Ingestion Kafka cluster Overview https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/jwPKIsnlii/ing estion-kafka-cluster-overview?orgId=1&from= now-15m&to=now&refresh=5m Ingestion cluster - Secor Job Lags, broker Processing Kafka cluster Overview https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/jwPKIsni/proc essing-kafka-cluster-overview?orgId=1&from= now-15m&to=now&refresh=5m Processing cluster - Secor Job Lags, broker Load Metrics https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/B-a5y6eZz/lo ad-metrics?orgId=1&from=now-1h&to=now&r efresh=1m CPU, Memory, Load Average, Disk utilization of all servers Host Details https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/mrXQlqCZz/h ost-details?orgId=1 Individual server basis - CPU, Memory, Disk, Load Average, IOPS, Network Usage Kubernetes / Pods https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/ab4f13a9892 a76a4d21ce8c2445bf4ea/kubernetes-pods?o rgId=1&var-datasource=Prometheus&var-clust er=&var-namespace=production&var-pod=ad minutils-7fb9b8c968-cbn2k&var-container=All Individual Pods Restarts Kubernetes / Compute / Workload - Custom https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/snapyxZGk/k ubernetes-compute-resources-workload-custo m?orgId=1&refresh=30s Max. Utilization of CPU and memory of all K8s services 88

=== PAGE 90 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Dashboard Name Dashboard Link Purpose Kubernetes / Compute resources / Cluster https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/efa86fd1d0c1 21a26444b636a3f509a8/kubernetes-compute -resources-cluster?orgId=1&refresh=30s Cluster & service basis CPU and memory usage NGINX https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/0000000025/ nginx?orgId=1&refresh=1m Management - NGINX Dashboard for TPS and Errors Druid https://diksha.gov.in/grafana/d/XWxgcjvZz/dr uid?orgId=1&from=now-3h&to=now&refresh= 5m Druid Raw cluster - Data source availability Figure 25: Grafana dashboard depicting HTTP status metrics and number of requests processed per second 89

=== PAGE 91 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 26: Grafana dashboard depicting the lag metrics at each consumer 90

=== PAGE 92 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 27: Grafana dashboard providing the ﬁrst line metrics of the infrastructure 91

=== PAGE 93 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 28: Grafana dashboard depicting the infrastructure utilisation metrics 92

=== PAGE 94 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 29: Graylog dashboard detailing the traﬃc patterns 93

=== PAGE 95 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 30: Graylog dashboard to view and analyze detailed logs of application and infrastructure 94

=== PAGE 96 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Incident Handling Process Figure 31: High 500 Error Handling Process 95

=== PAGE 97 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 32: Lag in Infra Process 96

=== PAGE 98 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 33: Data Issue in Reports Handling Process 97

=== PAGE 99 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Support Given DIKSHA’s scale, functional and user diversity, end user support is crucial. The DIKSHA team has well-deﬁned S1 and S2 support processes. S1 Support Process Figure 34: S1 Process Map Note: For detailed S1 processes, refer to Appendix N - S1 Support Process. 98

=== PAGE 100 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note S2 Support Process Figure 35: S2 Process Map Note: For detailed S2 support processes, refer to Appendix O - S2 Support Process. Issues Tracking and Resolution All issues are raised and tracked through JIRA. They are classiﬁed as per priority and assigned to respective teams for resolution and closure. Note: 1. For detailed ticket lifecycle, refer to Appendix P - Ticket Lifecycle. 2. For a sample issue tracker, refer to Appendix Q - Issue Tracker. 99

=== PAGE 101 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Setting up DIKSHA Support Services The guidelines and processes to set up DIKSHA support services are well deﬁned. Note: To aid any State set up support services for any DIKSHA program, refer to Appendix U - TPD Support System Guidelines v2.0 for Sharing with States . These guidelines in this document were used to set up support services for the NISHTHA teacher training program. Measure Measurement and analysis of data to generate reports and dashboards is important for various reasons. DIKSHA has robust reporting infrastructure and a well-deﬁned process to generate standard and customized reports. As mentioned earlier, full telemetry is instrumented into DIKSHA. Data captured remains just a data point or number until it becomes a valuable metric. The difference between data and metrics is, while data is merely a number, a metric is a quantitative measurement of data, in relation to what you are actually measuring. For example;the number 10 is a data point, but the metric is 10 content plays. Going further, the collected metric may be analyzed and used within multiple contexts to achieve different goals. For example; a State may want to track content plays of a piece of DIKSHA content to check if it has reached all students of Std. 5. They may also use the same metric to understand if the content needs to be brought down since not many students are playing it, or if they need to take any measures to popularize it. Report Conﬁguration Reporting Infrastructure The Hawk Eye project enables DIKSHA’s reporting infrastructure that packages: ● Generation of actionable datasets from Druid ● Conﬁguration of visualizations using Superset ● Publishing the charts as reports using Portal with additional functionality to add a summary, export and download . The generated reports allow the State PMUs, State outreach program administrators, users from the MHRD and others to view and understand DIKSHA usage in the context of their programs in and across states. They enable the States and the MHRD to drive targeted outcomes and demonstrate concrete progress made towards achieving stated goals. 100

=== PAGE 102 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Infrastructure Components The reporting infrastructure mainly packages together: ● Generation of actionable datasets from Druid ● Conﬁguration of visualizations using Superset ● Rendering of charts & Reports via the Portal and the Analytics framework ● Additional Summary, Export functionalities The information ﬂow among the components is brieﬂy depicted in the following diagram: Figure 36: DIKSHA Reporting Infrastructure Components 101

=== PAGE 103 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note DIKSHA Report Workﬂow Figure 37: DIKSHA Report Workﬂow 102

=== PAGE 104 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Using Hawkeye (DIKSHA’s reporting infrastructure): ● Reports that can be generated from data in Druid can be turned around faster, and the report/ data set is made available via the portal (requires DIKSHA login) ● A report can incorporate multiple charts ● The report can be enhanced (add action items for report consumers) by a user with the ‘Report Admin’ role ● Reports can be viewed and downloaded as a PDF/ Image from the portal for sharing (by users with the ‘Report Viewer’ role) ● The reporting infra can also be used for one-time reports - these can be retired once they’ve served their purpose Note: 1. For detailed information to conﬁgure reports, refer to Appendix R - Hawkeye Conﬁguration Guide. 2. For reporting workﬂows, refer to Appendix S - Hawkeye Workﬂows. It must be noted that: ● Reports cannot be generated from thin air. It is dependent on the required telemetry being generated. ● Reports must be tied to actions in order to be effective and being used. ● Data reliability and integrity is handled by underlying data pipeline infrastructure 103

=== PAGE 105 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Report Request Workﬂow Figure 38: DIKSHA Report Request Workﬂow 104

=== PAGE 106 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Part C DIKSHA Solutions 105

=== PAGE 107 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note DIKSHA Solutions Overview DIKSHA solutions enable learning, capacity building, or professional development solutions in the education domain. Depending on the usage scenario, these digital solutions are delivered in three modes: ● Portal applications, that can be accessed when connected to the Internet ● Mobile apps, that can be accessed on mobile devices ● Oﬄine Desktop applications that can be accessed on desktop computers or tablet devices when not connected to the Internet The following is a visual representation of solutions built across DIKSHA consumption and sourcing with digital infrastructure using building blocks that are not speciﬁc to any one solution. Figure 39: DIKSHA Solutions 106

=== PAGE 108 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Diverse Scenarios and Stakeholders India’s education landscape is large and diverse. Currently, DIKSHA offers solutions that have two interactions for ﬁve personas, in three scenarios. The same is illustrated in the following diagram. Figure 40: DIKSHA’s Diverse Stakeholders Elaborating the way the DIKSHA platform, solutions and tools are developed for diverse scenarios and stakeholders: ● 5 key personas - learners, parents, teachers, administrators, community members. The term personas refers to roles played by different people who are part of the DIKSHA ecosystem. The term teacher means anyone who helps a learner learn. Likewise, the term learner applies to any learner - young or adult. For instance, it includes teachers who are learning when undertaking a course. Community members refer to any individual or institution. The term administrator refers to anyone who is involved in the management of the learning process, be it in government or other sectors (e.g. private/NGO run schools). The term parent includes guardians and caregiving individuals in the life of a minor. ● 3 Generalized Scenarios - Learn, Help Learn, Manage Learn. At the core of the whole education ecosystem, three main scenarios play out. They are learning, helping the learning process and managing the learning process, in order to achieve learning outcomes. Therefore, digital infrastructure and architecture should focus on the development of solutions for these scenarios. 107

=== PAGE 109 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note ● 2 Key Interaction Categories - Learning Interactions, Administrative Interactions. Whatever the scenarios or the persona, there are only two interaction categories for education- learning or administration. Hence, any solution or tool offered on the DIKSHA platform creates interactions in either the learning or administrative space. Solution Categories Given the scenarios and stakeholders that DIKSHA caters to, the solutions offered can be categorized into: ● Consumption solutions ● Sourcing solutions ● Essential/Foundational solutions Consumption Solutions DIKSHA consumption solutions allow its users to access and utilize the solutions through the portal, mobile or oﬄine. Each persona has targeted solutions. For example: ● Students can learn by consuming digital content from DIKSHA’s vast library, scan QR codes printed in textbooks to access relevant content, etc. ● Teachers can build capacity by enrolling in courses and tracking their own progress. They can help students learn by creating study groups, tracking student progress, etc. ● Administrators can manage learning by planning and tracking targeted programs, projects and undertake surveys ● Parents can help their wards learn by keeping track of their ward’s progress, accessing study material, etc. ● Community members can help community members learn by creating study groups or making DIKSHA study material accessible to individuals or communities through Online or Oﬄine modes, etc. The possibilities are many and varied. Sourcing Solutions DIKSHA’s sourcing solutions consist of a set of reusable tools and services to source various types of digital learning assets.They enable you to create, source, curate and publish digital assets for speciﬁc needs for consumption. The DIKSHA sourcing web application has an inbuilt set of workﬂows to orchestrate the entire content lifecycle. The unique power that the DIKSHA sourcing application (viz. Vidyadaan) unleashes is that it enables collaboration and co-creation using crowdsourcing as against mere creation of assets. The impact of this is that all the digital assets required by an organization need not be created 108

=== PAGE 110 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note by them alone. Assets can be sourced from other organizations and individuals who can provide them. This potentially makes the process highly scalable allowing you to access capacity and competency beyond a select set of users. For example: ● State board A can access and utilize textbooks or chapters of textbooks from the NCERT or other State boards. ● State boards or the NCERT can source content from international schools, private players, open source communities who consent to share the use of their content ● Individual experts and pedagogues can be invited to contribute to speciﬁc projects. The possibilities are again endless. Essential/Foundational Solutions DIKSHA’s essential solutions consist of a set of reusable speciﬁcations and protocols that may be used by any consumption or sourcing solution. For example; registries and credentialing. Solutions on DIKSHA 13 Energized Textbooks Imagine textbooks which enable just-in-time access to unlimited interactive digital content to meet curriculum needs. The Energized Textbook solution allows educational boards to achieve that by enabling just-in-time access to digital content through QR codes printed in textbooks; be it curriculum textbooks used by students or Teacher Edition Textbooks (TET) for teachers. This solution allows educational boards to provide any learner, teacher or parent access to digital content that is curriculum-linked, specially-curated and highly-relevant for learning and/or teaching. For example; explanation videos, practice worksheets, sample tests, quizzes, courses, lesson plans, learning outcomes, pedagogy material, misconceptions and others. The users can access digital content for every chapter by scanning QR codes printed in the physical textbook using a mobile phone camera or by using the DIAL code associated with the QR code. The solution enables learners to visualize objects or understand concepts only by scanning a QR code in the textbook that is linked to the relevant video. For example; the anatomy and working of the human heart or formation of tornadoes. Similarly, teachers across the nation can get instant access to pedagogical best practices for each chapter when they want and where they want. The Energized Textbook solution enables 18 crore+ students and 70 lakh+ teachers to leverage technology in the same way as a select few have been able to do so far. As mentioned before, 13 Reference https://www.education.gov.in/sites/upload_ﬁles/mhrd/ﬁles/India_Report_Digital_Education_0.pdf 109

=== PAGE 111 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note both curriculum textbooks and Teacher Edition Textbooks (TET) can be energized using the solution. The solution can also be used by states/UTs and education boards to provide access to curated digital content for parents, ﬁeld coordinators supporting educational activities, even if a physical textbook does not exist. The solution includes a dashboard of digital content usage reports that can be used by States/UTs and educational boards to understand content needs and continuously improve digital content quality. ● 35 state/UT’s education departments, CBSE and NCERT are using the Energized Textbook solution ● Total 60 crore copies of 1,900 Energized Curriculum Textbooks are printed and distributed across the nation ● Over 90,000 pieces of digital content are curated and accessible via QR codes in these Energized Textbooks Teacher Professional Development Online courses allow roll out of structured learning programs targeted to build or enhance speciﬁc knowledge and skills for learners. Online courses enable learners to learn the skill at a place of convenience and at their own pace without having to leave their preferred premises. An online course on DIKSHA can contain learning material that is a mix of videos, interactive content, practice questions and reading material as well as assessments to evaluate learning. The users can be recognized for completing the course, by providing digitally veriﬁable certiﬁcates that can be shared by users with anyone. The solution allows for detailed monitoring of course enrollment, completion rates for states/UTs and education boards. This enables states/UTs and education boards to effectively manage the rollout of large scale training and skilling programs. The solution is being used by the Central and State government to roll out online teacher training and professional development programs, addressing some of the challenges of in-person training models like the need to be away from school, the potential dilution of instructions, the limitation of training scope and teachers covered. Education institutes are able to combine recorded sessions of experts, practitioners’ perspective as well as videos of skill application in the actual classroom to make the online course effective for teachers. Multiple courses can be rolled out to address different needs, including broader skills and pedagogical skills and tools required for speciﬁc grades and subjects. Teachers can take courses relevant for them as and when required throughout the academic year; and share their skill building accomplishments with their friends and colleagues using digital credentials received on course completion. The courses can also be leveraged to enable structured learning for students to complement school-based learning. ● NISHTHA, a national teachers training program, targeted for 42 lakh teachers is being rolled out on DIKSHA by NCERT using online courses 110

=== PAGE 112 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note ● During the lockdown period, 15 states rolled out Online Teacher Training programs on DIKSHA e.g. Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana, Gujarat, Delhi, CBSE. Between April to June 2020 total enrollments by teachers for courses has been 60 lakh of which 43 lakh completed courses from across 7 states and CBSE. ● Govt of India’s iGot program uses DIKSHA for COVID-19 training of doctors, nurses, ASHA workers, NCC, NSS, NYKS volunteers. Between April and June, 2020, over 17 lakh individual trainings have been completed and certiﬁed. Question Bank The DIKSHA platform enables creation and curation of curriculum linked questions of various types, including multiple choice questions (MCQ), ﬁll in the blanks (FTB), match the following (MTF) and subjective questions, along with correct answers and solutions. The questions are used for creating practice worksheets and tests for Energized Textbooks, assessments for Online Courses and for Quiz. For interactive questions like MCQ and FTB, the solution can give feedback to the user on their choice of answer. The questions can be linked to learning outcomes and usage data can be used by national and state governments to identify which learning outcomes are not achieved across states and nationally. It will help the government to plan targeted programs for teachers and students to reduce learning gaps systematically. By tagging questions to various attributes of frameworks on the platform and by leveraging AI and ML, the platform could be leveraged to deliver personalized learning environments, using the question bank capabilities. These tools have been used extensively by CBSE and certain states. Content Sourcing The content sourcing platform is built to source and curate curriculum-linked content for various solutions like Energized Textbooks, Online Courses or Quizzes. The platform allows you to source diverse digital content for example; explanation videos, questions, sample tests, learning outcomes, lesson plans, misconceptions, pedagogy material, etc. It supports multiple content types and formats including MP4, HTML, ECML, PDF, H5P and ePub. The solution will soon be enhanced to enable translation of digital content from one language to another. The platform supports multiple content sourcing models like sourcing from a pre-selected set of individuals or organizations, crowdsourcing contributions from masses (both organizations and individuals), and re-using digital content already published on the platform. The solution generates relevant actionable reports to help manage a large set of contributors, reviewers for curation and to track progress of content sourcing programs. The Center and States/UTs can leverage content sourcing tools to engage the education ecosystem of teachers, government institutes, community organizations and individuals at 111

=== PAGE 113 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note large. Teachers across the country use different teaching techniques to help their students learn effectively. The tool presents unlimited possibilities for the Center and States to tap into the combined intelligence and experience of their teacher ecosystem to source content and enable access to the best content for ALL students and teachers across the nation. ● VidyaDaan is a national program of DIKSHA for states/UTs to seek and for educationists, subject experts, schools, government and non-government organizations, individuals to donate/contribute open license e-learning resources for school education, to ensure continuity of quality learning. States/UTs can have their own unique frameworks and taxonomy for inviting contributions for all grades and across different languages. ● Since launch in April2020, VidyaDaan has received tens of thousands of digital content contributions and several states have initiated digital content sourcing projects using this capability. Content Authoring Apart from content sourcing tools, DIKSHA also has a content authoring tool which allows teachers or users, designated by Center or State departments, to create interactive digital content. The tool has an inbuilt curation process to ensure that only quality content is published in DIKSHA. Quizzes DIKSHA allows Central and State governments to enable learning in a fun way using the Quiz solution. The quiz can be a national/ state level competition or just a fun activity for the learner. The user can be recognized for Quiz participation and/or winning the Quiz using digital credentials which are digitally veriﬁable. This can be a very effective way to engage students, enhance their learning and application of their knowledge in a fun way relevant to curriculum and even otherwise. The Quiz can be conducted in multiple Indian languages on various themes. Case studies ● The Law ministry in collaboration with NCERT launched the Constitution Quiz for students to participate from across India on 14th April, 2020. ● A national level Yoga quiz was launched by the Hon’ Minister for HRD on 21st June, 2020 Content Consumption All users - be it teachers, students, parents or others, can ﬁnd and play/access their curriculum linked digital content, published by the Center, States/UTs or education boards, using any device - mobile, laptop or desktop in online or oﬄine mode. DIKSHA can be accessed using the DIKSHA 112

=== PAGE 114 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note mobile app or DIKSHA web portal 14 . DIKSHA enables multiple modes of access for users - as a guest user, or with a registered account on DIKSHA or using their State system login, if enabled by the state. Guest user mode enables easy access for a large set of ﬁrst time internet users. All users are able to deﬁne their preferences which are used by the platform to personalize their experience. For registered accounts, the solution allows creation of multiple users and easy access to digital credentials received by the user in DIKSHA. Creation of multiple users in the same account allows children to share devices for their learning needs Data Tools and Dashboards DIKSHA platform provides actionable reports and access to aggregated usage data for States/UTs to use so that they can monitor progress of state programs and take necessary actions to drive the programs. This ability is enabled for all DIKSHA solutions be it Energized Textbooks, Online Courses, Quiz and others. DIKSHA has two types of dashboards - Public and Administrator (can be viewed only by users in the Report Viewer role). Public Dashboards DIKSHA’s public dashboards are viewable by anyone without logging in by going to www.diksha.gov.in . The following are a few screenshots of the same: 14 https://diksha.gov.in/explore 113

=== PAGE 115 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 41: DIKSHA Public Usage Metrics Dashboard 114

=== PAGE 116 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 42: DIKSHA Public Contribution Metrics Dashboard 115

=== PAGE 117 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 43: DIKSHA Public Course Metrics Dashboard 116

=== PAGE 118 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 44: DIKSHA Public State Course Metrics Dashboard Administrator Dashboards Administrator dashboards can be viewed only by those users who have admin role permissions on DIKSHA. The following are screen shots of a few admin dashboards. 117

=== PAGE 119 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 45: DIKSHA Admin Dashboard 118

=== PAGE 120 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Figure 46: Report View 119

=== PAGE 121 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Chatbot Leveraging an open source chatbot framework, ‘TARA’, an interactive Chatbot engages DIKSHA users in multiple ways like navigating users to their content, training, delivering news and announcements, and clarifying doubts about DIKSHA. Future use-cases include get answers for curriculum related questions, practice or take a quiz. TARA uses artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning technologies to enable human-like chat interactions. Digital Credentials The DIKSHA platform has enabled the capability to issue digital credentials to a user on completion of a course or a quiz. The user can share digital credentials with anyone and are digitally veriﬁable. As solution needs evolve, the solution can be enhanced to enable Center and State governments to issue digital credentials for various purposes like best teacher awards. This is being used extensively for teacher training across states, and for credentialing course completion. The solution has been leveraged for other use cases as well, for example; to provide certiﬁcates to COVID warriors on iGOT. Collaboration DIKSHA enables collaboration in multiple ways. While formal collaboration can be initiated for content authoring and sourcing, the ability for individuals to collaborate informally is provided by DIKSHA’s Groups and Discussion Forums solutions. The groups solution allows individual members to get together for a purpose. A registered DIKSHA user can create any number of groups for speciﬁc purposes. Each group can have multiple members with varying roles and permissions to access DIKSHA content. Activities can be assigned to groups or members of the group. As a group administrator you can : ● create groups ● add members ● remove members ● make a member the group admin ● remove a member from the admin status ● add activities for the group ● remove activities from the group ● send notiﬁcations to the group 120

=== PAGE 122 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note User interactions on DIKSHA are signiﬁcantly enriched if users interact with their peers using discussion forums and in this process learn via collaboration. A group administrator can enable or disable discussion forums and enable or restrict members to participate in discussions. The discussion forums are enabled for the following capabilities to the users: ● Discussion forums for groups by the group administrator ● Broadcast notiﬁcations to the users ● Initiate discussion topic/participate in existing discussions Surveys and Observations The Surveys and Observations solution provided by DIKSHA enables easy capture of opinion, feedback or to make note of information about certain entities.This solution is particularly useful for education administrators in the “manage learn” scenario. It helps plan and track targeted improvement projects. A few examples where Surveys may be used: ● CRP sends out a survey form to teachers to get feedback on a Cluster Academic Meeting. ● A survey is rolled out for all teachers in the State to collect details of student dropouts or enrollment. ● A survey is rolled out to assess the overall mental well-being of education staff. A few examples where Observations may be used: ● An observation of the daily processes and functioning of the school by a BEO ● Observation of mid-day meal process in a school by HM ● Comprehensive assessment of Schools by the HMs on the basis of a framework like Shala Siddhi or School Quality Assessment and Assurance (SQAA). The CBSE and the UP and HP State education boards used this solution to launch the above-mentioned education quality assessment and improvement programs. 121

=== PAGE 123 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Part D DIKSHA as a Digital Public Good 122

=== PAGE 124 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Overview Digital Public Good (DPG) DPG is deﬁned as: “open source software, open data, open AI models, open standards and open content that adhere to privacy and other applicable laws and best practices, do no harm, and help attain the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).” 15 The translation of public goods onto digital platforms has resulted in the use of the term digital public goods. DPGs have gained popularity with the growing recognition of the potential for new technologies to be implemented at a national scale to better service delivery to citizens. Digital technologies have also been identiﬁed by countries, NGOs and private sector entities as a means to achieve SDGs. Digital Public Good Alliance (DPGA) In mid-2019 the UN Secretary-General’s high-level panel on digital cooperation published a report - ‘The Age of Digital Interdependence’ 16 . It resulted in the formation of a multi-stakeholder initiative named Digital Public Goods Alliance (DPGA), 17 whose mission is to accelerate the attainment of SDGs in low- and middle-income countries by facilitating the discovery, development, use of, and investment in digital public goods. Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) “DPI refers to digital solutions that enable basic functions essential for public and private service delivery, i.e. collaboration, commerce, and governance. Think about existing shared public infrastructure such as roads and education, but online.” 18 - Shivkumar, O’Neil, and Kristiansen Nordhaug 18 https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/08/4-reasons-you-should-care-about-digital-public-infrastructure 17 https://digitalpublicgoods.net/ 16 https://digitalcooperation.org/ 15 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_public_goods 123

=== PAGE 125 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Ethical Considerations for DPI The Internet and social media platforms could be described as accidental public infrastructure. These infrastructures are only public insofar as they are open to the public and therefore host an increasing proportion of our civic life. But, they often exploit the private data of their users while restricting those users from contributing meaningfully to platform governance 19 . The Initiative for Digital Public Infrastructure studies, imagines and builds a new, more resilient Internet for the public good; an Internet guided by the values of users and their communities rather than those of corporations and investors. As the demand for digital public infrastructure becomes more widespread, it’s important to prioritize the ethical considerations when designing such systems. 20 The approach to the ethics of digital public infrastructure should be robust, resilient, and applicable to countries across the world. Technology developers must design DPI that: ● adapt to emerging needs, concerns, technological developments systems do not undermine user rights, ● can be accessed by a variety of users, regardless of background or experience, ● the systems are regularly revised and maintained after they are built Similarly policy makers must ensure that: ● the design and deployment of digital public infrastructure is deliberated upon ● The deliberation processes seeks input and feedback from groups have historically been marginalized ● There are continuous evaluations to check how digital systems are affecting the communities they serve ● There are clear ways to reform the systems, protect user rights ● There is transparency and accountability for politicians and technology developers. 20 Reference https://medium.com/omidyar-network/the-growing-demand-for-digital-public-infrastructure-requires-c oordinated-global-investment-and-an-8ce1a22e4d6c 19 Reference https://publicinfrastructure.org/ 124

=== PAGE 126 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Physical and Digital Resources Physical Resources Digital Resources Limited supply Abundance is an inherent characteristic of digital resources in the digital commons Become scarce or depleted, when used Nondepletable Scarcity may result in competition and rivalry Nonexclusive, and nonrivalrous Can be inﬁnitely stored, copied, and distributed at close to zero cost Many sectors from information science, education, ﬁnance, healthcare and beyond have relevant examples of DPGs. Free & Open Source Software (FOSS) and Creative Commons Licenses FOSS has allowed greater dissemination of software in society. Since FOSS applications can be customized, users can add local language interfaces (localization), which expands the availability of the digital public good to more in that country/society/region, where users speak that language. The Open Educational Resources (OER) 21 movement has popularized the use of copyright ('copyleft') licenses like the Creative Commons 22 , which allows the content to be freely re-used, shared, modiﬁed and redistributed. Thus all OER are digital public goods. OER have reduced the costs of accessing learning materials in schools and higher education institutions in many countries of the world. In India, the Ministry of Education has supported the development of the DIKSHA OER portal 23 for teachers to upload and download materials for their teaching-learning. DIKSHA Platform as DPI and Assets as DPGs India’s Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) journey and the Digital India initiative have been no less than a miracle with most of them working for population at scale. These public digital infrastructure platforms are seen as transformational and are studied across the world. Many of the countries have been requesting India to make these available as Digital Public Goods (DPG) for their use. The Indian government has taken several steps in making this happen with 23 DIKSHA - https://diksha.gov.in 22 Creative Commons - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creative_Commons 21 OER - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Educational_Resources 125

=== PAGE 127 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note DIKSHA 24 being available as DPGs. In addition to the software, many of the DIKSHA assets such as process templates, knowledge base, aggregate anonymized open data 25 , etc are also open sourced as DPGs. DIKSHA DPG List The following is a list of assets that DIKSHA offers as DPGs: ● DIKSHA software code - DIKSHA’s software code is open source. The code is available as DPG ● DIKSHA program data - DIKSHA programs capture and process data. This data is made available as DPG. ● DIKSHA Content - All DIKSHA content assets are licensed as CCBY. This is DPG. ● NDEAR Policy Framework - NDEAR policy framework document, which maps and explains every building block, is available on the website can be offered as Digital Public Good to the world 25 NDSAP Policy for open Government data - https://data.gov.in/sites/default/ﬁles/NDSAP.pdf 24 DIKSHA Open Source - https://diksha.gov.in/help/diksha-oss/ 126

=== PAGE 128 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Part E DIKSHA Vision for the Future 127

=== PAGE 129 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note History DIKSHA is a national platform for school education, an initiative of National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSEL), Ministry of Education (MoE), Government of India (GoI). As elaborated earlier, DIKSHA is developed on the core principles of open architecture, open access, open licensing with diversity, autonomy and choice as outlined in the Strategy and Approach Paper for the National Teacher Platform released by the former Hon’ Minister for Human Resources Development Shri Prakash Javdekar in May, 2017. DIKSHA was launched by the Hon’ Vice President of India, Shri M Venkaiah Naidu, on Sept 5th, 2017 and has since been adopted by 36 states/UTs as well as by CBSE, NIOS, KVS, NVS , NCERT and by crores of learners and teachers. Under the PM eVidya initiative of the GoI, which was declared as part of the Atmanirbhar Abhiyan, DIKSHA has been declared as ‘One Nation, One Digital Platform’. DIKSHA aims to allow collaboration and matches multiple stakeholders at the Central and State level to build a shared infrastructure for public good, providing a boost to all the organizations/ departments interested in leveraging technology to enhance educational outcomes. Since its inception, DIKSHA has evolved into a multi-stakeholder, globally unique, Made-in-India initiative which leverages existing highly scalable and ﬂexible digital infrastructures, while keeping teachers as the fulcrum. The journey that commenced with the conceptualization of an idea amongst a few entities, has become an empowering movement for the education community of the nation. NDEAR, was launched by Hon. Prime Minister on 29th July 2021, with a vision to create a unifying national digital infrastructure to energize and catalyze the education ecosystem. As a technological framework, NDEAR aims to enable existing systems to upgrade and become interoperable, while making available its 36 building blocks across 12 categories for the creation of new tools and solutions. The core building blocks of DIKSHA comprises about 60% of NDEAR building blocks, having enabled some successful use-cases of NDEAR such as: energized textbooks, online courses, content authoring, content sourcing, interactive quizzes, questions banks, chatbot, analytics and dashboard. In the times of Covid-19 pandemic, the platform has experienced unprecedented rise in access by learners and teachers across the country. Till date on DIKSHA, there have been more than 4 billion learning sessions, over 52 Billion learning minutes and over 34 Billion page hits. DIKSHA leverages NDEAR policy framework, building blocks and standards. Future Given the wide reach and acceptance of DIKSHA as THE national digital platform for education, the possibilities are inﬁnite. It is an example where all pillars of society - Samaj (Civil Society), 128

=== PAGE 130 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Sarakar (Government) and Bazar (Commercial Enterprise) - can meaningfully collaborate to bring about transformation in the societal landscape. It is towards this end that DIKSHA envisions the future. Innovation through Collaboration & Cooperation DIKSHA adhering to the NDEAR building block premise and built with underlying Sunbird architecture opens possibilities to build innovative solutions through collaboration and cooperation. The autonomous, interoperable and generic capabilities of the Sunbird building blocks have the potential to quickly enable speciﬁc and diverse solutions to serve use cases for multiple purposes, with compounding value when connected or combined together. Global Adoption Being open source and DPG, DIKSHA it can be adopted and adapted globally. The pandemic showed the world how DPI, when leveraged, can be a gamechanger for equitable distribution of goods and services. Uninterrupted schooling, and teacher skilling that happened on the DIKSHA platform through various Central and State programs showcased the robustness of the platform. Many countries and organizations want to replicate the DIKSHA recipe of success in their educational landscape. DIKSHA offers any stakeholder to build sovereign programs and solutions so that they ﬁnd their own path to achieve their own objectives by: ● Creating and considering current education policy ● Using and tweaking technology to build/modify sovereign solution(s) as per sovereign control ● Implementing programs and managing budgets with accountability mechanisms and existing institutional structures ● Measuring and improving programs, reforms and policies through data visibility and analysis (Ability to See) Solution Areas In the near future, DIKSHA aims to focus on solutions for: ● Teacher learning ● Early learning ● School education ● Leadership education ● Capacity building By strengthening the infrastructure, knowledge, content, measurement and personalization layers. 129

=== PAGE 131 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Leveraging Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) & Machine Learning(ML) AI and ML will be leveraged to strengthen and build capability for current and future DIKSHA solutions. It is the way forward to quickly address the issue of scale at least in some areas. For example, India’s diversity requires learning assets in at least 30 languages. To enable it, the only way forward is to use AI and ML. 130

=== PAGE 132 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Part F List of Appendices 131

=== PAGE 133 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Appendix A - Functional & Nonfunctional Requirements Appendix B - Delivery Plan Status Dashboard Appendix C - Telemetry Speciﬁcations Appendix D - Design Note on DataSets and Data Exhausts Appendix E - DIKSHA Release Notes Appendix F - Release Documentation Process Appendix G - DIKSHA Release Upgrade Document Appendix H - DIKSHA User Manual Appendix I - API Reference Documentation Appendix J - DIKSHA Quality Assurance Process Appendix K - DIKSHA RCA Process Appendix L - DIKSHA UAT Execution sheet Appendix M - Regression Test case suite for DIKSHA NF & Circle Regression Appendix N - S1 Support Process 132

=== PAGE 134 ===
DIKSHA Technical Note Appendix O - S2 Support Process Appendix P - Support Ticket Lifecycle Appendix Q - Issue Tracker Dashboard Appendix R - Hawkeye Conﬁguration Guide Appendix S - Hawkeye Workﬂows Appendix T - List of Code Repositories Appendix U - Support System Process 133